The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol.
1/3, by I.B. Pole Evans

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Flowering Plants of South Africa; vol. 1/3

Author: I.B. Pole Evans

Release Date: August 8, 2020 [EBook #62884]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERING PLANTS ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)









                        THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF
                             SOUTH AFRICA.

 A MAGAZINE CONTAINING HAND-COLOURED FIGURES WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE
             FLOWERING PLANTS INDIGENOUS TO SOUTH AFRICA.


                               EDITED BY

            I. B. POLE EVANS, C.M.G., M.A., D.SC., F.L.S.,

     Chief, Division of Botany and Plant Pathology, Department of
                        Agriculture, Pretoria;

  and Director of the Botanical Survey of the Union of South Africa.


                                VOL. I.


                            [Illustration]


                The veld which lies so desolate and bare
                Will blossom into cities white and fair,
                And pinnacles will pierce the desert air,
                And sparkle in the sun.
                        R. C. MACFIE’S “EX UNITATE VIRES.”


   LONDON: L. REEVE & CO., LTD., 6, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

SOUTH AFRICA: THE SPECIALITY PRESS OF SOUTH AFRICA, LTD. P.O. BOX 3958,
              JOHANNESBURG; P.O. BOX 388, CAPETOWN. 1921

                       [_All rights reserved._]




                                  TO

                           MRS. HENRY BURTON

                                  OF

                VOORSPOED, RETREAT, CAPE OF GOOD HOPE,

         A GREAT ADMIRER OF HER COUNTRY’S PLANTS, TO WHOSE
         ENTHUSIASM “THE FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH AFRICA”
         OWES ITS ORIGIN, THIS, THE FIRST VOLUME, IS GRATEFULLY
         DEDICATED IN RECOGNITION OF THE SERVICES
         RENDERED BY HER TO SOUTH AFRICAN BOTANY AND
         HORTICULTURE.


DIVISION OF BOTANY, PRETORIA,

   _August, 1921_.




FLOWERING PLANTS OF SOUTH AFRICA




PREFACE


The cultivation of South African plants in Europe dates back to early
times.

Indeed, it may safely be assumed that it was in vogue soon after the
Dutch settlement at the Cape, for Holland during the 16th and 17th
centuries held first place in European horticulture. Her cities even
vied with one another in the establishment of gardens of exotic plants,
many of which came from the Cape.

These treasures created such interest and attracted such attention that
Cape plants soon became the fashion and object of envy throughout
Europe. Collectors were specially despatched to these shores for the
purpose of hunting out and securing their botanical wealth.

Evidence also is not lacking that the cultivation of indigenous plants
was carried out at the Cape prior to 1700.

Be this as it may, little remains to-day in South Africa to do credit to
the past preservation and cultivation of our native flora.

In recent years, however, considerable interest has again sprung up in
this direction; in fact, it is rapidly becoming fashionable to have a
rockery of aloes, vijgies, and other succulents as one of the chief
adjuncts to the garden.

Apart from these--perhaps better-known plants--there are many beautiful
flowering herbs, shrubs and trees of the veld, which might with
advantage be grown in our gardens and around our homes.

It is with the object of bringing these gems of nature to the notice of
the public that this publication is offered.

A work of this kind is of necessity a costly undertaking, and its future
existence and ultimate success will depend largely on the support which
it receives at the hands of the public.

The publication of the present volume has only been made possible
through the interest and keenness of a South African lady, whose love
for her country and its natural beauties has been the means of procuring
the necessary funds for the initiation of the work.

It is proposed to issue this publication as an illustrated serial, much
on the same lines as the well-known Curtis’s _Botanical Magazine_, and
for imitating which no apology need be tendered.

Should the publication be the means of stimulating further interest in
the study and cultivation of our indigenous plants amongst the rising
generation, the desire and object of its promoters will be achieved.

Living plants suitable for illustration, plants of economic value, or
plants of general interest, will always be gladly received and welcomed
by the Editor.

As regards the illustrations the Editor has been most fortunate in being
able to place the work of that skilful artist, Miss K. A. Lansdell,
before the public, while the descriptions have been prepared by Dr. E.
Percy Phillips, Botanist in charge of the National Herbarium, to both of
whom it is a pleasure to express one’s special thanks for the trouble
and care which they have taken.

For the information of those of our readers who have not been fortunate
enough to visit our country or our inland capital, it may be added that
the illustration on our cover represents a glimpse of the magnificent
Union Buildings at Pretoria, under whose shadow this work is being
prepared, and on whose site the plants here figured are grown.

It has been the Editor’s privilege and good fortune to see a
comparatively bare kopje converted in the course of a few years into the
site of a grand and stately building surrounded with many of the
country’s most beautiful and interesting herbs and shrubs.

The illustration depicts such characteristic plants as the arborescent
_Aloe Marlothii_, Berg.; the handsome _Aloe Wickensii_, Pole Evans (in
the centre); _Aloe aculeata_, Pole Evans; the neat _Aloe Peglerae_,
Schönland; _Cotyledon orbiculata_, Linn.; _Encephalartos Altensteinii_,
Lehm; and some arborescent euphorbias.

Although most of the plants just mentioned are typical of the vegetation
of the Transvaal, an endeavour will be made in our magazine to depict in
each volume as far as possible an equal number of floral representatives
from all the Provinces.

As the authority for colour nomenclature, _Colour Standards and Colour
Nomenclature_, by R. Ridgway, Washington, 1912, has been adopted.

I. B. POLE EVANS.

Pretoria, 1920.

[Illustration: _1._

K.A. Lansdell del.

AGAPANTHUS UMBELLATUS, L’HERIT.]


PLATE 1.

AGAPANTHUS UMBELLATUS.

_Cape Province_, _Natal_, _Orange Free State_, _Basutoland_, and
_Transvaal_.

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALLIOIDEAE.

AGAPANTHUS, _L’Herit_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
798.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Agapanthus umbellatus=, _L’Herit. Sert. Angl._ 17; _Fl. Cap._ vi. 402.

       *       *       *       *       *

This well-known garden plant, commonly called the “Agapanthus” or “Blue
Lily,” was introduced into cultivation in England from the Cape as far
back as 1692, and was figured by Commelin of Amsterdam in 1697.

In South Africa the plant is characteristic of the vegetation found on
high mountain ranges. It usually occurs on well-drained slopes.

It is a herbaceous plant with a tuberous rootstock from which 6-10 broad
strap-shaped leaves arise. The lower stalk is about a metre high, and
bears an umbel of 20-50 handsome blue flowers.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ short, tuberous, with fleshy cylindric roots.
_Leaves_ dark green, 6-10, basal, 20-60 cm. long, 2-4 cm. broad,
strap-shaped, obtuse, glabrous. _Peduncle_ O·25-1 metre high, terete,
glabrous. _Inflorescence_ a many-flowered umbel. _Spathe-valves_ 2·5 cm.
long, 2 cm. broad at the base, ovate, acuminate, withering in the mature
inflorescence. _Floral-bracts_ 2·7 cm. long, linear. _Pedicels_ about 6
cm. long, terete, jointed at the apex. _Flowers_ blue; perianth-tube 1·7
cm. long, 6 mm. in diameter; lobes 2-5 cm. long, 9 mm. broad,
oblanceolate, obtuse. _Stamens_ inserted at the throat of the
perianth-tube; filaments 2·5-3 cm. long, arcuate; anthers oblong.
_Fruit_ a triquetrous capsule.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _2._

K.A. Lansdell del.

ALOE GLOBULIGEMMA, I. B. POLE EVANS.]


PLATE 2.

ALOE GLOBULIGEMMA.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe globuligemma=, _Pole Evans in Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Africa_, vol. v.
pp. 30-32, Pls. x., xi.

       *       *       *       *       *

This remarkable Aloe was collected by Messrs. Wickens and Pienaar in
M‘Phathlele’s Location in the Pietersburg District during January, 1914.
Specimens brought to the Botanical Laboratories, Pretoria, flowered
during July and August of the same year.

In M‘Phathlele’s Location the plant occurs in vast numbers in a very
gregarious manner on the open sandy plains. In fact, it is not uncommon
to find long, continuous belts of thickly crowded plants extending for
two or three hundred yards in length. The plant is typical of the Low
Veld and the river valleys which run from the Zoutpansberg into the
Limpopo basin.

At first the racemes are furnished with widely separated spherical to
globular flower-buds which develop with considerable slowness.

The unopened flowers are rich nopal red (R.C.S.), tinged with green at
the tips. When open, the flowers become a sulphur-yellow (R.C.S.).

Our illustration was made from a plant in the Aloe collection at the
Botanical Laboratories, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--A succulent, stemless plant. _Leaves_ 16-23 in a dense
rosette, glaucous, erect-spreading, 45-50 cm. long, 8-9 cm. broad at the
base, lanceolate-ensiform, acuminate, acute and recurved at the apex,
unspotted, somewhat flat at the base and canaliculate above, with
cartilaginous wavy and toothed margins; teeth pale brown and at right
angles to the margins, 1·5-2 mm. long, and about 8-9 mm. apart, deltoid,
recurved. _Inflorescence_ a panicle, with 5-7 spreading horizontal to
oblique branches with a few small deltoid-acute empty bracts at the
base. _Peduncle_ 06-1 metre high, stout, glaucous, naked. _Racemes_
densely flowered, 22-40 cm. long. _Flowers_ secund, all pointing towards
the centre of the inflorescence and at the same time slightly deflexed;
young buds distinctly globular; in open flowers nopal-red (R.C.S.),
green at the tips; mature flowers sulphur-yellow (R.C.S.) and tinged
with red towards the base. _Floral-bracts_ reflexed, 5-6 mm. long,
ovate-cuspidate, scariose, pellucid. _Pedicels_ recurved, 3-4 mm. long.
_Perianth_ 25 mm. long, cylindrical-ventricose; outer segments free for
15-17 mm., obtuse and recurved at the apex, 3-5-veined; inner segments
obtuse, recurved, tipped with auburn (R.C.S.) at the apex, with 3 inner
veins. _Stamens_ exserted for 11 mm.; filaments slightly recurved, the
exposed portion chestnut-brown (R.C.S.) to black. _Anthers_ mars-orange
(R.C.S.). _Style_ pale sulphur-yellow (R.C.S.), stout, recurved.
_Capsule_ shortly stipitate, 23 mm. long, 13 mm. in diameter,
oblong-ovoid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 2.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, lower part of spike;
     Fig. 3, apex of spike.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _3._

K. A. Lansdell del.

ARCTOTIS DECURRENS, JACQ.]


PLATE 3.

ARCTOTIS FOSTERI.[A]

_Clanwilliam._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe ARCTOTIDEAE.

ARCTOTIS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 458.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Arctotis Fosteri=, _N.E. Br._

     ARCTOTUS _Fosteri_; _Herbacea_, 60-90 cm. alta. _Folia_ inferiora
     lyrato-pinnatisecta, 30-40 cm. longa, 7-9 cm. lata, longe
     petiolata, ambitu obovato-oblonga, lobis lateralibus utrinque 3-4,
     oblongis subacutis dentatis, lobo terminali latissime ovato obtuso
     grandidentato; folia superiora sessilia, lanceolata, acuta,
     subintegra; omnia supra parce pubescentia, subtus albo-lanata.
     _Pedunculi_ 17-19 cm. longi, striati, pubescentes. _Capitula_ 7-9
     cm. diametro. _Involucri bracteae_ exteriores ovatae,
     subulato-caudatae, virides; interiores oblongo-obovatae, obtusae,
     apice membranaceae, rubescentes. _Radii flores_ acuti, albi vel
     carnei, subtus purpurei, quisque basi maculo nigro et aurantiaco
     instructi. _Disci flores_ nigro-brunnei, antheribus luteia. _Pappi
     squamae_ lanceolatae, acutae vel subobtusae. _Ovarium_
     villosum.--N. E. BROWN.

     Cape Province: Clanwilliam Division, near Clanwilliam, _Foster_.

       *       *       *       *       *

This handsome species of _Arctotis_ was raised in the Garden of the
Division of Botany, Pretoria, from seed received in 1916 from Mr. C.
Foster, of Clanwilliam, after whom I have much pleasure in naming it.
The large size of the flower head and the delicate colouring of the
rays make it worthy of a place in all South African Gardens. At Pretoria
it flowers freely and has set mature seed.

DESCRIPTION:--A herbaceous perennial 60-90 cm. high. _Leaves_ many,
lyrate; lower leaves 30-40 cm. long, 7-9 cm. broad, lanceolate in
outline, obtuse, produced at the base into a long petiole, sparsely
pubescent on the upper surface, white-woolly on the lower surface;
leaf-lobes about 4 cm. long, 1-5·2 cm. broad, oblong, obtuse, with
toothed margins; the terminal lobe much larger, otherwise similar;
petiole up to 16 cm. long, flat on the upper surface, convex beneath,
sparsely glandular-pilose; upper leaves sessile, lanceolate, acute,
sparsely pilose, with more or less entire margins. _Peduncles_ pale in
colour at the base, gradually becoming indian purple (R.C.S.) towards
the apex, 17-19 cm. long, terete, striate, pilose, the hairs becoming
reddish and denser towards the apex. _Capitulum_ solitary, 7-9 cm. in
diameter when fully expanded. _Involucral bracts_ many-seriate; the
outer green, ovate, with a hairy subulate appendage; the inner reddish
and membranous at the apex. _Receptacle_ slightly convex. _Ray-florets_
female. _Corolla_ limb white or shrimp-pink (R.C.S.) above, with a
golden-yellow and purple spot near the base, and eugenia red to vandyke
red (R.C.S.) beneath. _Pappus_ of several membranous scales as long as
the corolla-tube. _Ovary_ with a dense tuft of basal hairs.
_Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 4-5 mm. long, campanulate
above, cylindrical below; lobes lanceolate with black tips. _Pappus_ of
several membranous scales about half length of the corolla-tube. _Ovary_
villous, with a dense basal tuft of hairs. _Fruit_ villous, crowned with
the persistent pappus scales.--E. PERCY PHILLIPS.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 3.--Fig. 1, portion of ray-floret; Fig. 2, pappus-scale of
     ray-floret; Fig. 3, disc-floret; Fig. 4, pappus-scale of
     disc-floret; Fig. 5, apex of style showing the stigmas; Fig. 6,
     fruit; Fig. 7, involucral-bracts (all enlarged).

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _4._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CYRTANTHUS ANGUSTIFOLIUS, AIT.]


PLATE 4.

CYRTANTHUS CONTRACTUS.[B]

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii.
p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyrtanthus contractus=, _N.E. Br._

     CYRTANTHUS _contractus_; _Bulbus_ 4-6 cm. diametro, ovoideus,
     brunneus. _Folia_ 2-3, adscendentia, 30-50 cm. longa, 8-12 mm.
     lata, linearia, longe et acutissime acuminata, basi in petiolum
     teretem angustata, glabra. _Pedunculus_ 18 cm. vel ultra longus, ad
     1 cm. diametro, teres, fistularis, glaber, purpurascens, ad apicem
     4-10-florus. _Bracteae_ 4·5-5 cm. longae, basi 8 mm. lati,
     lineari-attenuatae, membranaceae. _Pedicelli_ adacendentes, 2-4 cm.
     longi, rubri. _Perianthium_ nutante, coccineum; tubus 5-6 cm.
     longus, ad medium leviter ventricosum et circa 8 mm. diametro, basi
     longe et valde contractus et circa 1·5-2 mm. diametro; lobi 1·3 to
     1·5 cm. longi, 7 mm. lati, elliptico-ovati, acuti. _Stamina_
     perianthii lobis breviora; antherae luteae. _Ovarium_ 1 cm. longum,
     ovoideum. _Stylus_ inclusus, stigmatibus recurvis. _Semina_
     complanata, atrata.--N. E. BROWN.

     Transvaal: on kopjes near Mooi Plaates farm, in the vicinity of
     Pretoria, _Miss J. Stuart_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The specimens from which our drawing was made were collected by Miss J.
Stuart of Pretoria, on the slopes of stony kopjes near the farm “Mooi
Plaates,” about 5 miles out of Pretoria. During the spring months the
plant is very conspicuous on the kopjes when it flowers freely, usually
after the grass has been burnt off, and from this it derives its common
name of “Fire Lily.”

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 4-6 cm. in diameter, ovoid; tunics brown,
membranous. _Leaves_ 2-3, contemporary with or appearing after the
flowers, 30-50 cm. long, 0·8-1·2 cm. broad, linear, acuminate, acute,
tapering to a terete petiole above the flattened base, glabrous.
_Peduncle_ vandyke red (R.C.S.), 18 cm. long, lengthening in the fruit,
10 mm. in diameter, terete, hollow, glabrous. _Spathe-valves_ 4·5-5 cm.
long, 8 mm. broad near the base, linear, acute, membranous, glabrous.
_Inflorescence_, a 4-10-flowered umbel. _Flowers_ pendulous, scarlet-red
to carmine (R.C.S.), faintly scented; pedicels 2-4 cm. long,
strawberry-pink (R.C.S.), jointed at the apex; perianth-tube 5-6 cm.
long, tubular, narrowed at the base, with an inflated portion about the
middle; lobes 1·3-1·5 cm. long, 7 mm. broad, ovate-ellipsoid, acute,
with a small tuft of white hairs on the inner surface just below the
apex. _Stamens_ inserted just below the throat, a little shorter than
the perianth-lobes; anthers chrome-yellow (R.C.S.), oblong. _Ovary_ 1
cm. long, 0·5 cm. in diameter, ovoid; style about the length of the
perianth-tube, included; stigmas recurved. _Seeds_ black, flattened.--E.
PERCY PHILLIPS.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 4.--Figs. 1 and 2, anthers back and side view; Fig. 3, apex
     of the perianth, showing the tufts of hairs.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _5._

K. A. Lansdell del.

GERBERA JAMESONI, BOLUS.]


PLATE 5.

GERBERA JAMESONI.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe MUTISIACEAE.

GERBERA, _Gronov._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 497.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gerbera Jamesoni=, _Bolus_; _Gard. Chron._, 1889, vol. 5, p. 772. fig.
122; _Bot. Mag._ t. 7087.

       *       *       *       *       *

This plant, the “Barberton Daisy,” has attracted much attention in
recent years as an addition to the herbaceous garden.

It was first discovered in the Transvaal by the collector Rehmann about
1878, and later by the Hon. R. Jameson on the mountains round Barberton.
In 1889 it flowered at Kew Gardens and was illustrated in the
_Gardener’s Chronicle_ for that year. Shortly afterwards a coloured
plate and description appeared in the _Botanical Magazine_ (t. 7087).
The specific name was proposed by the late Dr. Bolus, who himself
collected the species at Barberton.

A mass of these plants in full bloom is very striking, the scarlet rays
standing out in strong contrast to the green leaves.

The specimen from which the present illustration was made flowered at
the Botanical Laboratories, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ perennial. _Leaves_ basal, numerous, 22-45 cm.
long, 5-10 cm. broad, somewhat oblong in general outline, deeply lobed,
with the terminal lobe broadly ovate, acute, pubescent on both surfaces,
especially on the veins beneath; petiole 25-40 cm. long, terete, pilose,
tinged with red at the base. _Peduncle_ 25-40 cm. long, terete, pilose,
bearing a solitary capitulum. _Capitulum_ 8-10 cm. in diameter when
fully expanded. _Involucral-bracts_ about 3-seriate, 1-1·5 cm. long,
lanceolate, acuminate, acute, woolly. _Receptacle_ flat, naked.
_Ray-florets_ female, scarlet to spectrum-red (R.C.S.); lower limb
represented by 2 linear strongly reflexed lobes. _Ovary_
glandular-pubescent. _Disc-florets_ hermaphrodite. _Corolla_ bilabiate;
tube 7 mm. long, cylindrical, glabrous; anterior limb of 2 linear
recurved lobes; posterior limb 3-toothed, spreading. _Ovary_ 6 mm. long,
cylindrical, glandular-pubescent; _stigma_ bifid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 5.--Fig. 1, ray-floret; Fig. 2, disc-floret; Fig. 3, apex of
     style, showing the two stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _6._

K. A. Lansdell del.

GLADIOLUS PSITACCINUS, H.K., VAR. COOPERI, B. K. R.]


PLATE 6.

GLADIOLUS PSITTACINUS, var. COOPERI.

_Basutoland_ and _Transvaal_.

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus psittacinus=, _Hook f._ var. =Cooperi=, _Bkr. Bot. Mag._ t. 6202;
_Fl. Cap._ vi. 158.

       *       *       *       *       *

This striking species of _Gladiolus_ belongs to the section
_Dracocephali_ of the genus which contains some seven species all
characterised by having the upper segments hooded. It is a favourite
with cultivators, and has also been taken up by nurserymen who grow
blooms for sale. Like a great many of our beautiful native species, it
was left to Kew Gardens to bring the species to public notice.

Corms of this _Gladiolus_ were brought to England by Mr. Thomas Cooper,
who collected in South Africa for Mr. Wilson Saunders. It first flowered
at Kew in 1872, when it was described and figured.

The species is easy of cultivation, and flowers at Pretoria in November.
Apart from the interest it is to gardeners generally, it should be of
special interest to breeders, as there seems little doubt that some very
fine hybrids could be raised from this species.

DESCRIPTION:--A tall plant O·9-1·2 metres high. _Corm_ red, 2·5-6 cm. in
diameter, globose; tunics chartaceous, broad, ultimately breaking up
into fibres. _Leaves_ 6-8, 60-90 cm. long, 2-3 cm. broad, ensiform,
acute, slightly narrowed at the base, glabrous, rigid. _Inflorescence_ a
lax 5-10-flowered spike, 20 cm. or more long. _Spathe-valves_ 5-9 cm.
long, oblong-lanceolate, sub-acute, kildare-green (R.C.S.). _Flowers_
large, hooded, lemon-yellow (R.C.S.), striped with scarlet-red (R.C.S.).
_Perianth-tube_ curved, 5-6 cm. long, trumpet-shaped, glabrous; three
upper lobes forming a hood 2-2·5 cm. broad, ovate or obovate, acute,
with a distinct claw; the posterior lobe crimson without, lighter in
colour within, smaller than the other two upper lobes; the three lower
lobes smaller than the upper lobes and strongly reflexed; the anterior
lobe 3-4 cm. long, O·5-2 cm. broad, broadly-lanceolate, acute,
lemon-yellow (R.C.S.) in the lower half; the lateral lower lobes 2-2·5
cm. long, 0·4-0·5 cm. broad, lanceolate, acute. _Stamens_ inserted at
the base of the perianth-tube, shorter than the upper lobes, arcuate.
_Ovary_ ellipsoid; style slightly longer than the stamens, arcuate;
stigmas terete, pubescent on the stigmatic surface. _Capsule_ 2-2·5 cm.
long, ellipsoid. _Seeds_ discoid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 6.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, apex of style,
     showing the three stigmas; Figs. 3 and 4, back and side view of
     stamens.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _7._

K. A. Lansdell del.

LEUCADENDRON STOKOEI, PHILLIPS.]

[Illustration: _8._

K. A. Lansdell del.

LEUCADENDRON STOKOEI, PHILLIPS.]


PLATES 7 AND 8.

LEUCADENDRON STOKOEI.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

LEUCADENDRON, _R. Br._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p.
169.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leucadendron Stokoei=, Phillips sp. nov.

     LEUCADENDRON _Stokoei_; _Rami_ et ramuli glabri. _Folia_ 7-8·5 cm.
     longa, 1-2·1 cm. lata, oblonga vel oblongo-lanceolata, apice
     obtusa, basi paullo angustata, glabra. _Inflorescentia_ ♂ 2 cm.
     longa, 2·5 cm. lata; bractae involucri 1·1 cm. longae, apice
     obtusae, glabrae viscidaeque, eximae reflexae; bractae floris 1 mm.
     longae, lanceolatae, acuminatae, apice subacutae, basi villosae.
     _Inflorescentia_ ♀ 2·5 cm. longa, 1·7 cm. lata; bractae involucri
     reflexae; bractae floris 6 mm. longae, 1·1 cm. latae, apice
     obtusae, sericeae. _Fructus_ 7 mm. longus, 6 mm. latus, obovatus,
     anguste alatus.

     Cape Province: Caledon Division, Standford, near Caledon, _Stokoe
     in National Herbarium_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The remarkable group of South African plants--the _Proteaceae_--still
continues to yield interesting novelties, though it was monographed as
recently as 1910. This is especially true of the genus _Leucadendron_,
on which much work remains to be done.

The specimens from which our illustration was made were collected by Mr.
T. P. Stokoe in the Klein River Mountains at Sinkerhausgat, near
Standford, in the Caledon Division. Mr. Stokoe has made some interesting
discoveries in this region, amongst which was this new _Leucadendron_
which he forwarded to the Division of Botany in September, 1918. It is
quite distinct from any other species of _Leucadendron_, inasmuch as the
male inflorescence is surrounded by large bracts giving it the
appearance of a _Protea_.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ and branchlets glabrous. _Leaves_ 7-8·5 cm.
long, 1-2·1 cm. broad, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, bluntly
mucronate, slightly narrowed at the base, glabrous, very finely
glandular when seen under a lens; leaves surrounding the inflorescence
longer. _Male inflorescence_ hidden by the upper leaves and quite
surrounded by brown bracts, shortly peduncled, 2 cm. long, 2·5 cm. in
diameter; the inner bracts 1·1 cm. long, oblong, obtuse, glabrous,
viscid, longer or as long as the inflorescence; the outer situated on
the short peduncle, viscid and reflexed; receptacle 7 mm. long, 8 mm.
broad, subglobose. _Floral bracts_ 1 mm. long, lanceolate, acuminate,
subacute, villous at the base. _Perianth_ 2 mm. long, glabrous. _Stigma_
clavate, much thicker than the style. _Female inflorescence_ hidden by
the upper leaves, very shortly stalked, 2·5 cm. long, 1·7 cm. broad, the
short peduncle bearing brown reflexed bracts; receptacle 1·6 cm. long, 3
mm. broad, cylindrical. _Floral bracts_ 6 mm. long, 1·1 cm. broad,
transversely oblong, villous above. _Fruiting head_ 3·5-4 cm. long, 3·5
cm. in diameter; scales 1·5 cm. long, 1·2 cm. broad, suborbicular,
slightly narrowed at the base, tomentose without, except near the apex.
_Fruits_ 7 mm. long, 6 mm. broad, obovate in outline, flat on one side,
convex on the other, honeycombed, with a narrow membranous wing.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 7.--Fig. 1, male inflorescence; Fig. 2, longitudinal section
     of male inflorescence.

     PLATE 8.--Fig. 1, young female inflorescence; Fig. 2, longitudinal
     section of female inflorescence; Fig. 3, fruiting head; Fig. 4,
     floral bract × 4; Fig. 5, fruit × 4.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _9._

K. A. Lansdell del.

TULBAGHIA VIOLACEA PARV.]


PLATE 9.

TULBAGHIA VIOLACEA.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALLIEAE.

TULBAGHIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. 798.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Tulbaghia violacea=, _Harv. Bot. Mag. t. 3555. Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. 407.

       *       *       *       *       *

This beautiful little _Tulbaghia_ has a special interest attached to it,
inasmuch as it flowered in Baron von Ludwig’s garden at the Cape of Good
Hope, and was there illustrated and described by Harvey, who sent his
description and drawing to the _Botanical Magazine_ for publication. In
this respect it differs from most of the other Cape plants, which were
described and figured from specimens grown in Europe.

The present illustration was made from specimens cultivated at the
Botanic Gardens, Durban, Natal, from tubers presented by Mrs. Todd of
Pietermaritzburg. Notwithstanding the unpleasant odour of garlic, the
species is worth cultivation. It is commonly known as the “Wild Garlic.”

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ tuberous. _Leaves_ crowded; basal leaves
rudimentary and membranous; upper leaves 6-10, erect, 20-30 cm. long,
5-8 mm. broad, linear, acute, glabrous, concave on the upper surface,
rounded beneath. _Peduncles_ erect, 30-60 cm. long, terete.
_Inflorescence_ a 10-20-flowered umbel. _Spathe-valves_ 2-2·5 cm. long,
5 mm. broad at the base, ovate-linear, acuminate, acute, membranous.
_Pedicles_ 2·5-4 cm. long, terete. _Flowers_ pale ampare-purple to light
haryense-violet (R.C.S.). _Perianth-tube_ 1·1-1·5 cm. long, 4 mm. in
diameter, cylindrical, slightly inflated at the base; lobes 1-1·1 cm.
long, 3-5 mm. broad, elliptic or lanceolate, acute or obtuse.
_Corona-lobes_ 3, 1·5 mm. long, opposite the inner segments. _Stamens_
subsessile, in 2 whorls about halfway down the perianth-tube; anthers
sub-globose. _Ovary_ sessile, sub-globose; style 2 mm. long, thick;
stigma capitate.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 9.--Fig. 1, perianth laid open to show corona lobes and
     stamens × 1½.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _10._

K. A. Lansdell del.

RICHARDIA ANGUSTILOBA, SCHOTT.]


PLATE 10.

RICHARDIA ANGUSTILOBA.

_Transvaal, Basutoland._

       *       *       *       *       *

AROIDEAE. Tribe PHILODENDREAE.

RICHARDIA, _Kunth._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 982.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Richardia angustiloba=, _Schott in Journ. Bot._ 1865, 35; _Fl. Cap._ vii.
37.

       *       *       *       *       *

The specimen figured was first mentioned in the _Gardener’s Chronicle_,
1892, as _Calla Pentlandii_, and two years later in the same publication
was again brought to notice as _Richardia Pentlandii_, under which name
it was described and figured in the _Botanical Magazine_. Mr. N. E.
Brown, who monographed the genus for the _Flora Capensis_, considers it
the same as _Richardia angustiloba_ which was described as early as
1865. It was introduced into cultivation by Mr. R. Whyte, Pentland
House, Lee, who raised flowers in 1892, and exhibited it at a meeting of
the Royal Horticultural Society and was awarded a first-class
certificate.

Specimens of the tubers were taken to Kew by Mr. E. E. Galpin in May,
1892.

Our present illustration was made from plants flowered by Mr. H. H.
Wickens, Officer in Charge of the Union Buildings Garden, Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Leaves_ dark green, unspotted; petiole 30-60 cm. long,
terete, glabrous; lamina 22-30 cm. long, 11 cm. broad at the widest
part, ovate, acute, and produced into a filiform appendage at the apex
1·2 cm. long, sagittate at the base, glabrous, with the midrib prominent
beneath and channelled above. _Peduncle_ over 1 metre high, longer than
the leaves, terete, glabrous. _Spathe_ gamboge-yellow, dark purple at
the base inside, 10-14 cm. long, 4-4·5 cm. broad across the middle, 7-10
cm. across the mouth, loosely convolute for two-thirds of its length,
then expanding into a broad, nearly horizontal limb produced into a
subulate tip 1·5 cm. long and with recurved margins. _Spadix_ yellow,
4·5 cm. long, cylindrical. _Ovaries_ with subsessile stigmas, pale
greenish-white. _Staminodia_ none; anthers yellow. _Calla Pentlandii_,
_Gard. Chron._ 1892, p. 124; _Richardia Pentlandii_, _Gard. Chron._
1894, p. 590; _Bot. Mag._ t. 7397.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 10.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, spathe removed to
     show the spadix.

     F.P.S.A., 1920.

[Illustration: _11._

K. A. Lansdell del.

FREESIA REFRACTA, KLATT.]


PLATE 11.

FREESIA SPARRMANNII _var._ FLAVA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

FREESIA, _Klatt_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 704.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Freesia Sparrmannii=, _N.E. Br._ var. =flava=, _N.E. Br._

_Gladiolus_ Sparrmanni, _Thunb. in Kongl. Vet. Acad. Handlingar_, 1814,
p. 189, t. 9A, and _Fl. Cap. ed Schultes_, p. 49.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to the _Flora Capensis_ the only species in the genus
_Freesia_ is _F. refracta_, Klatt, which is a native of the eastern
districts of Albany, Bathurst, etc., and is characterised by having
(among other characters) the slender lower part of the perianth-tube
shorter than the upper broader part and not more than twice as long as
the bracts. But there are at least three other species found in other
regions that distinctly differ in habit or in the tube of the flower or
in both. One of them collected by Burchell in Bechuanaland and at
present undescribed, has a very long tube. Another is a plant found in
the coast districts of Swellendam, Riversdale, Ladismith, etc., figured
and described by Thunberg under the name of _Gladiolus Sparrmanni_, upon
which I found the species _Freesia Sparrmannii_. The reference to this
figure is omitted by Schultes in his edition of Thunberg’s _Fl. Cap._,
and is not quoted by Baker, but it accurately agrees with the plant
Zeyher collected along the Buffeljagts River in Swellendam Division and
distributed under No. 4027. It conspicuously differs from _F. refracta_
by the very much longer slender part to the perianth tube, and although
Thunberg’s plant and that collected by Zeyher have purplish-tinted
flowers, I place the plant here figured as a yellow variety of it,
because I find that the late P. MacOwan, in a letter preserved at Kew,
gives the following particulars concerning this species, which he also
considers distinct from _F. refracta_. He writes: “All along the coast
from Cape Point towards Agulhas, notably near Mossel Bay, the other
_Freesia_ grows wild. I have never seen it in my Eastern Province
peregrinations.... Its colour varies very much, from pale golden
daffodil tint to pure white, and is either with or without purplish
stains on the outside of the perianth-segments. Here, at the Hort.
C.B.S., we paid much attention to this lovely bulb, grew it year after
year, roguing out all the yellow and purple-stained individuals and
sowing the whitest. This is the ‘_Freesia refracta alba_’ of gardens.”

This note gives the origin of _F. refracta_ var. _alba_, Baker, _Handb.
Irid._ p. 167, which should now be called _F. Sparrmannii_ var. _alba_,
for it certainly is not the same as the true _F. refracta_, and
Thunberg’s original name must be upheld.

The plant here figured is doubtless the pale golden form mentioned by
MacOwan, and it differs from the yellow-flowered _F. xanthospila_ by the
very long slender part of its perianth-tube.--N. E. BROWN.

Our illustration was made from specimens grown in the Gardens of the
Division of Botany from bulbs presented by Mr. J. Shand, of Ladismith,
Cape Province.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ about 4 cm. long, 3 cm. in diameter, produced into
a short neck and densely covered with fibres. _Leaves_ basal, 6-8 cm.
long, ·5-1 cm. broad, acute, somewhat sheathing at the base, glabrous.
_Peduncle_ 9·5 cm. long, with the upper portion bent at a right angle.
_Spathe-valves_ 1 cm. long, ovate, subacuminate, acute, membranous in
the upper portion. _Perianth-tube_ 5·2 cm. long, 1·2 cm. in diameter
above, campanulate in the upper portion and becoming slenderly tubular
in the lower half, yellow; lobes 1·2 cm. long, 1 cm. broad,
ovate-oblong, or subrotund, rounded above, yellow. _Style_ 5-6 cm. long,
filiform, 6-lobed; lobes 5 mm. long, linear, somewhat spathulate at the
apex.--E. PERCY PHILLIPS.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 11.--Fig. 1, anther; Fig. 2, style arms.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _12._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CRASSULA FALCATA, WILLD.]


PLATE 12.

CRASSULA FALCATA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

CRASSULACEAE.

CRASSULA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 657.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Crassula falcata=, _Wendland, Bot. Beobachtungen_, p. 44 (1798), _Willd.
Enum._ p. 341 (1809); _Fl. Cap._ vol. ii. p. 338.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among rock plants there are few which equal this fine _Crassula_ for
brilliant colouring. It is easy to propagate and flowers freely. The
species is common in the Eastern Province, and is found in flower during
the month of June. The specimen from which our illustration is made was
collected by Mr. P. J. Pienaar at Grahamstown and flowered in the
Gardens of the Division of Botany.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ succulent, 30-55 cm. high, simple. _Leaves_ connate
at the base, fleshy, 6-9 cm. long, 1·5-2·5 cm. broad, decreasing in size
upwards, obliquely falcate, obtuse, glaucous. _Peduncle_ reddish in
colour. _Inflorescence_ a dense trichotomous cyme. _Calyx-lobes_ 3 mm.
long, ovate or oblong, obtuse, canescent. _Petals_ 1 cm. long, connate
at the base; lobes linear-lanceolate, subobtuse. _Stamens_ nearly as
long as the petals. _Styles_ 5, subulate. _Squamae_ minute.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 12.--Fig. 1, carpels and squamae × 5.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _13._

K.A. Lansdell del.

CLIVIA MINIATA. HEGEL.]


PLATE 13.

CLIVIA MINIATA.

_Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CLIVIA, _Lindl._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Clivia miniata=, _Regel, Gartenflora_♀, 1864, p. 131, t. 434; _Fl. Cap._
vol. vi. p. 229.

_Imantophyllum_ (?) _miniatum, Hook. Bot. Mag._ t. 4783.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species, indigenous to Natal, represents only one of many of our
native plants, which have been brought to the notice of horticulturists
by English Nurserymen. A living plant was exhibited at a meeting of the
Horticultural Society in February 1854 by Messrs. Backhouse, who
imported the plant from Natal. The specimen from which our illustration
was made was collected by Miss K. A. Lansdell at Ifafa on the South
Coast of Natal. The species is a shade lover, and is usually found
flowering in the shelter of rocks and trees. The size and number of the
flowers have been much improved by cultivation, and several hybrids have
been raised from the species. The flowers may vary in colour from a red
to a yellowish-red.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ a fleshy rhizome, 1·5-2 cm. in diameter, with
numerous fleshy cylindrical roots. _Leaves_ many, 40-50 cm. long, 5-6·5
cm. broad, strap-shaped, acute, slightly narrowed at the base, the leaf
bases forming a distinct swelling just above the rhizome, glabrous,
bright green. _Peduncles_ shorter than the leaves, compressed, sharply
2-edged. _Inflorescence_ a 12-20-flowered umbel. _Spathe-valves_ 4 cm.
long, 7-8 mm. broad, ovate-oblong, membranous. _Floral bracts_ 2·5 cm.
long, linear. _Flowers_ erect. _Perianth_ divided almost to the base;
tube about 5 mm. long; segments 5-7 cm. long; the inner 1·1 om. and the
outer 1·8-2·1 cm. broad at the widest part, oblanceolate; the inner
emarginate; the outer minutely thickened at the apex; all obtuse,
gradually narrowed to a claw; bright red, with white margins at the
lower half. _Stamens_ included; filaments compressed; anthers linear,
versatile. _Ovary_ 5-6 mm. long; ellipsoid, bluntly 3-angled; style
slender, as long as the perianth; stigma trifid, sometimes bifid.
_Fruit_ a bright red berry, globose, 1·5 cm. in diameter. _Seeds_ 1 or
few, subglobose.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 13.--Fig. 1, section of peduncle; Fig. 2, bract; Fig. 3,
     transverse section of ovary; Fig. 4, style and stigmas; Fig. 5,
     fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _14._

K. A. Lansdell del.

GARDENIA GLOBOSA, THUNB.]


PLATE 14.

GARDENIA GLOBOSA.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

RUBIACEAE. Tribe GARDENIEAE.

GARDENIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 89.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Gardenia globosa=, _Hochst. in Flora_, 1842, p. 237; _Bot. Mag._ t.
     4791; _Harv. Thes. Cap._ p. 4, t. 5; _Fl. Cap._ vol. iii. p. 5;
     _Wood, Natal Plants_, vol. iv. t. 376.

       *       *       *       *       *

This handsome plant is a shrub or sometimes becomes a small tree, and is
without doubt one of our finest native flowering shrubs. It is common in
Natal, where it flowers in early spring and summer. The large fragrant
bell-shaped flowers are produced in great profusion and give to the
plant a very striking appearance. The species has been known to European
cultivation for over sixty years, but is usually grown in the
greenhouse. It is frequently seen in gardens in Durban, Natal, and
specimens have been grown in Queens Park, East London, but the plant has
not received the attention from South African horticulturists which it
deserves.

Our illustration was made from specimens collected by Miss K. A.
Lansdell in the Stella bush near Durban, Natal. The native name is
“Isi-Qoba.”

DESCRIPTION:--A _shrub_ or small tree. _Branches_ with dark-coloured
bark, glabrous. _Leaves_ opposite; petioles 3-5 mm. long; blade 5-15 cm.
long, 2-3·5 cm. broad, lanceolate or sometimes oblanceolate, obtuse or
acute, gradually tapering to the base, entire, with a prominent reddish
mid-rib beneath, glabrous; stipules about one-third of the length of the
petiole, ovate, acuminate, minutely pubescent, soon deciduous. _Flowers_
terminal, axillary or clustered. _Pedicels_ 1-2 mm. long, minutely
pubescent. _Calyx_ 3-4 mm. long, minutely pubescent and glandular
without, silky within; tube campanulate; lobes acute. _Corolla_ white,
usually with 5 faint pink lines within, which may become darker near the
base and broader on the lobes, sometimes spotted; tube 2-5 cm. long, 1-8
cm. in diameter above, campanulate, suddenly constricted and narrowed
above the calyx, minutely pubescent without, densely tomentose within;
lobes spreading, half as long as the tube. _Anthers_ linear. _Ovary_
1-celled, with numerous ovules; stigmas white or pink. _Fruit_ a brown
berry, crowned with the persistent calyx-lobes, many seeded. _Seeds_
minute, immersed in the fleshy parietal placentas.

     PLATE 14.--Fig. 1, style arms; Fig. 2, fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _15._

K. A. Lansdell del.

RICHARDIA REHMANNI. ENGL.]


PLATE 15.

RICHARDIA REHMANNI.

_Natal, Transvaal, Swaziland._

       *       *       *       *       *

AROIDEAE. Tribe PHILODENDREAE.

RICHARDIA, _Kunth_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 982.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Richardia Rehmanni=, _N.E. Br. in Gard. Chron._ 1888, vol. iv. p. 570;
_Bot. Mag._ t. 7436; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vii. p. 36; _Wood, Natal Plants_,
vol. vi. t. 512.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species was first collected by the traveller Rehmann and described
by Engler in 1883 as _Zantedeschia Rehmanni_. Among English
horticulturists the plant attracted a lot of attention, and was several
times referred to in the _Gardener’s Chronicle_. The chief attraction to
cultivators is the deep red colour of the spathes, but when grown in
English gardens and also in its native climate, the colour varies
considerably. Dr. Medley Wood notes that at the Natal Herbarium, Durban,
the original deep red colour returned to the plants after being
cultivated fifteen years. This loss of colour, however, does not appear
to be constant among plants which flowered for the first time at the
Division of Botany Gardens, Pretoria, from tubers which were sent by S.
G. Marwick, Esq., Assistant Commissioner, Hlatikulu, Swaziland. In these
the colour ranged from pale pink to deep red. After fertilization,
however, and during the formation of the fruits the colour gradually
fades from the spathes and they become green. The species was introduced
into England by Mr. R. W. Adlam of Natal, who sent tubers to the
Cambridge Botanic Gardens. The leaves vary from a uniform green to green
with white markings, or green with darker green markings.

Our illustration was made from specimens cultivated at the Natal
Herbarium, Durban, Natal.

DESCRIPTION:--_Plant_ about 0·5 metre high. _Leaves_ 3-5, the lower
reduced to mere sheaths; petiole 15-30 cm. long, deeply channelled down
the face, rounded on the back, stem-clasping at the base; blade 40-60
cm. long, 6-8 cm. broad, lanceolate, acute, with a subulate point,
narrowed at the base into the petiole, entire, with undulating margins,
and the mid-rib prominent beneath, dark green, sometimes with white,
sometimes with green markings, shining. _Peduncle_ shorter than the
leaves, terete, glabrous, olive-green. _Spathe_ 10-15 cm. long, with a
tube 4-5 cm. long and 1·8-2 cm. in diameter, with an ovate acuminate
limb, varying in colour from almost white to a deep rose or aster purple
(R.C.S.) in the upper portion, greenish-yellow below, without a dark
blotch round the base of the spadix. _Spadix_ stout, with male flowers
on the upper half and female flowers on the lower half. _Ovary_
glabrous; stigma sessile. _Fruit_ a berry. _Seeds_ subglobose.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 15.--Fig. 1, plant, reduced; Fig. 2, spadix; Fig. 3, ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _16._

K. A. Lansdell del.

ADENIUM MULTIFLORUM, KLOTZ.]


PLATE 16.

ADENIUM MULTIFLORUM.

_Transvaal, Zululand, Portuguese East Africa._

       *       *       *       *       *

APOCYNACEAE. Tribe ECHITIDEAE.

ADENIUM, _R. & S._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. 2, p. 722.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Adenium multiflorum=, _Klotzch in Peters, Reise Mossamb. Bot._ p. 279, t.
xliv., _Fl. Cap._ vol. 4, sect. 1, p. 514.

       *       *       *       *       *

The specimen from which our illustration was made is growing in the
Gardens of the Division of Botany, Pretoria, and was presented by Mr. A.
E. Antrobus, Cloud’s End, Louis Trichard, in the Zoutpansberg District.
The flowers appeared in September before the leaves, which only made
their appearance the following month. The species does very well on a
rockery, and when it flowers is a very pleasing sight.

DESCRIPTION:--A plant with a very large tuber just below the
ground-level and from which the branches spring. _Branches_ more or less
succulent, glabrous. _Leaves_ appearing after the flowers, sub-sessile,
3·5-9 cm. long, 1·5-6·5 cm. broad, obovate, obtuse, narrowed to the
base, dark green and very shiny above, pale green and dull beneath, with
the mid-rib and lateral veins distinct above, the mid-rib alone
prominent beneath. _Inflorescence_ cymose, up to 5-flowered, terminal.
_Sepals_ lanceolate, pilose. _Corolla-tube_ about 3 cm. long, 1·2 cm.
broad above, tubular below, pilose without and within on the broadened
portion; lobes, 1·7-2·5 cm. long, about 1 cm. broad, elliptic-oblong, or
obovate, shortly acuminate, acute, with crinkled edges, usually sparsely
pubescent on the upper portion, pink, with dark red margins. _Anthers_
densely villous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 16.--Fig. 1, plant, reduced; Fig. 2, leaf; Fig. 3, calyx;
     Fig. 4, stamen; Fig. 5, pistil.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _17._

K. A. Lansdell del.

ALOE PIENAARII, POLE EVANS.]


PLATE 17.

ALOE PIENAARII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINEAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe Pienaarii=, _Pole Evans in Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr._ vol. v. p. 27,
t. vi. vii.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species was first collected by Mr. P. J. Pienaar at Smit’s Drift,
near Pietersburg, in January 1914, where it is very common on and around
the isolated granite kopjes, though it also occurs in the open flat
country. A number of plants were obtained for the gardens of the Union
Buildings at Pretoria, where they have been established, and specimens
are also growing in the Aloe collection at the Division of Botany
Gardens, Pretoria. The species flowers from May to July.

DESCRIPTION:--_Herb_, succulent, stemless. _Leaves_ 35-60 in
a dense rosette, 60-80 cm. long, 12-15 cm. broad at the base,
lanceolate-ensiform, acute, reddish-green or blueish, beset along the
margins with small chestnut-coloured (R.C.S.) deltoid thorns 2 mm. long
and 5-7 mm. apart. _Inflorescence_ 2-3 from the same rosette, copiously
panicled, erect, 1·25-1·65 metres high, with about 8 arcuate-erect
branches subtended at the base with deltoid-acuminate bracts; racemes
densely flowered, 25-35 cm. long, cylindrical-conical. _Bracts_ at first
densely imbricated, afterwards embracing the pedicels, 20 mm. long, 11
mm. broad, broadly ovate-acuminate, acute, many-nerved. _Pedicels_
erect, spreading, 15-20 mm. long, greenish-scarlet. _Perianth_ 35-38 mm.
long, somewhat 3-angled and cylindrical, at first scarlet, greenish at
the tips, becoming citron-yellow (R.C.S.) when open; outer segments
shorter than the inner, free, acute; inner slightly recurved at the apex
and more obtuse, and the lateral ones becoming compressed towards the
apex so as to close the mouth of the tube. _Stamens_ just exserted;
filaments bright chalcedony-yellow (R.C.S.); anthers grenadine-red
(R.C.S.). _Capsule_ enclosed within the dry perianth, 20 mm. long,
cylindrical-trigonous, woody. _Seeds_ 4-5 mm. long, irregular, narrowly
winged.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 17.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, bract; Fig. 3,
     stamen; Fig. 4, capsule.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _18._

K. A. Lansdell del.

ALOE PRETORIENSIS, POLE EVANS.]


PLATE 18.

ALOE PRETORIENSIS.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

LILIACEAE. Tribe ALOINAE.

ALOE, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f._ vol. iii. p. 776.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Aloe pretoriensis=, _Pole Evans in Trans. S. Afr. Roy. Soc._ vol. v. p.
32, t. xii. xiii.

       *       *       *       *       *

This handsome _Aloe_ occurs on the northern slopes of the hills around
Pretoria, and is especially abundant on Meintjes’ Kop. It is also found
near Lydenburg, at Barberton, the Premier Mine, and along the foot of
the Lebombo range of mountains. The flowers usually appear in May, and
when in flower the plants attract large numbers of brightly coloured
sun-birds. The tall branched inflorescence forms the most striking
feature of the plant, and when one compares it with that of _Aloe
lineata_, which is unbranched and differs in many other important
respects, it seems almost incredible that _A. pretoriensis_ should have
been mistaken by so many botanists for _A. lineata_ as has been done.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stem_ short, sometimes reaching 1 metre in height, 8-12
cm. in diameter. _Leaves_ numerous, 30-60 in a dense rosette,
arcuate-erect, 30-65 cm. long, 3-7 cm. broad at the base, 8-10 mm.
thick, lanceolate, acuminate, acute, flat on the upper surface and
slightly canaliculate towards the tip, convex beneath, light green or
slightly glaucous, with the margins armed with red sharply pointed horny
prickles 3-4 mm. long and 10-17 mm. apart, and in old leaves the tips
withered and reddish in colour. _Inflorescence_ a lax panicle 2-3·5
metres high. _Peduncle_ stout with 2-8 ascending branches, subtended by
deltoid-ovate bracts at the base; racemes dense, 15-50 cm. long,
conical-cylindric. _Bracts_ at first densely imbricate, 15-20 mm. long,
10-12 mm. broad, ovate-deltoid, many veined. _Pedicels_ 20-25 mm. long,
lengthening and becoming erect in the fruit. _Perianth_ pendulous, 40-43
mm. long, cylindrical, slightly swollen towards the middle and tapering
upwards, peach-red (R.C.S.), with yellowish-green tips. _Stamens_
shortly exserted; filaments greenish-yellow; anthers reddish-brown.
_Style_ shortly exserted. _Capsule_ greyish, enwrapped in the dry
perianth, 15-18 mm. long, about 6 mm. in diameter, cylindrical,
3-angled. _Seeds_ dark, 2-5 mm. long, very narrowly 3-winged.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 18.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, part of a leaf,
     natural size; Fig. 3, bract.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _19._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CLERODENDRON TRIPHYLLUM, H.H.W. PEARSON.]


PLATE 19.

CLERODENDRON TRIPHYLLUM.

_Transvaal, Orange Free State, Natal, Zululand._

       *       *       *       *       *

VERBENACEAE. Tribe VITICEAE.

CLERODENDRON, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p.
1155; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v. sect. 1, p. 220.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyclonema triphyllum=, _Harv. Thes. Cap._ vol. i. p. 17, t. 27.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the charming spring plants found on the High Veld of the
Transvaal and especially abundant after early winter veld fires. The
corolla is of the same deep blue seen in many species of _Lobelia_, and
the colour of the flowers makes the plant a conspicuous object in the
veld. Our illustration was made from specimens collected by Dr. I. B.
Pole Evans at Kaalfontein, between Pretoria and Germiston.

DESCRIPTION:--A low undershrub 12-60 cm. high. _Stems_ erect from an
underground woody rootstock, angular, striate, usually puberulous at the
nodes, glabrous when mature. _Leaves_ in whorls of 3 or 4, or opposite,
sessile, 1·3-6 cm. long, 2-1·3 cm. broad, lanceolate or occasionally
linear, acute or subacute, narrowed at the base, entire, glabrous,
gland-dotted beneath. _Inflorescence_ a 1-3-flowered pedunculate
axillary cyme. _Peduncles_ up to 2·6 cm. long, with 2 opposite
lanceolate bracts near the summit. _Flowers_ pedicellate. _Calyx_ 3-7·5
mm. long, campanulate, 5-lobed, 5-ribbed, glabrous, with a tube
equalling or slightly exceeding the ovate acute segments. _Corolla_ deep
chicory-blue to royal purple (R.C.S.); tube 3-7·5 mm. long, bent,
villous or glabrous at the throat; 4 upper lobes unequal, obliquely
obovate or elliptic, obtuse; lower lobes obovate or oblong, exceeding
the upper. _Stamens_ glabrous. _Fruit_ a 1-2-seeded drupe, 1-1·8 cm.
long, 9-1·3 cm. in diameter, ovoid, smooth.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 19.--Fig. 1, fruit.

[Illustration: _20._

K. A. Lansdell del.

GLADIOLUS REHMANNI, BKR.]


PLATE 20.

GLADIOLUS REHMANNI.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe IXIEAE.

GLADIOLUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. 709.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gladiolus Rehmanni=, _Baker_; _Handb. Irid._ p. 216; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi.
p. 153.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species of Gladiolus is here figured for the first time. Rehmann
collected it between the Elands River and Klippan, and it was then lost
sight of until rediscovered by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans at Nylstroom,
Waterberg District, in February, 1917, and has now been established in
the Gardens of the Division of Botany, Pretoria. We are indebted to Mrs.
Frank Bolus for identification.

DESCRIPTION:--_Corm_ small, 2 cm. in diameter, subglobose, with light
brown membranous tunics. _Leaves_ 4-6, basal, 30-60 cm. long, 1·2 cm.
broad, linear, glabrous, rigid, with prominent ribs. _Peduncle_,
including the inflorescence, 60-65 cm. long. _Spike_ 20-25 cm. long,
lax. _Outer spathe-valve_ 7-9 cm. long, oblong-lanceolate, at first
bright green, then turning to dark slate-violet (R.C.S.). _Perianth_
white to pale mauve (not red as stated in the _Flora Capensis_); tube
curved, 2-2·5 cm. long, funnel-shaped in the upper half; lobes 4-4·5 cm.
long, the 3 upper 2-2·3 cm. broad, obovate-spathulate; the 3 lower 1·8
cm. broad, oblong, with yellow-green markings at the throat. _Filaments_
arcuate; anthers purple. _Style_ filiform, with 3 cuneate stigmas.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 20.--Fig. 1, bulb and leaves, reduced; Fig. 2, outer
     spathe-valve; Fig. 3, stamens, front and side view; Fig. 4, apex of
     style with stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _21._

K. A. Lansdell del.

PACHYPODIUM SUCCULENTUM.]


PLATE 21.

PACHYPODIUM SUCCULENTUM.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

APOCYNACEAE. Tribe ECHITIDEAE.

PACHYPODIUM, _Lindl._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 722.

       *       *       *       *       *

     =Pachypodium succulentum=, _DC., Prodr._ vol. viii. p. 424; _Fl.
     Cap._ vol. iv. sect. 1, p. 517.

     _Pachypodium tuberosum, Lindl., Bot. Reg._ t. 1321.

       *       *       *       *       *

The species of Pachypodium figured in our illustration was first
described by the famous traveller, Carl Thunberg, in the year 1794.
Thunberg gathered his plants, on which he based his description, between
the Gouritz and Sundays River. The name he gave to the species was
_Echites succulenta_. Robert Brown, in 1909, surmised that the plant
placed by Thunberg in the genus Echites would most likely constitute a
distinct genus, and in 1830 Lindley confirmed this, and founded the
genus _Pachypodium_ upon, and gave an excellent figure of, this species
of _Pachypodium_ in the _Botanical Register_, at t. 1321, but gave it a
new specific name, which is omitted from the _Flora Capensis_.

Our present illustration was made from specimens growing on the
rockeries of the Division of Botany, Pretoria, which were presented by
Mr. Silvesta of Port Elizabeth.

DESCRIPTION:--Plants with a very large tuberous stem, partly above
ground, with several semi-succulent branches arising from the upper
portion of the tuber. _Branches_ with a waxy covering, glabrous or
finely hairy when young. _Leaves_ in fascicles, 1-4 cm. long, 2-6 mm.
broad, linear or linear-lanceolate, obtuse, with recurved margins, green
and pubescent above, paler and tomentose below. _Spines_ arising in
groups of 2-3 from an evident cushion, the two lateral spines longer and
spreading, the medium spine shorter and erect, sometimes absent.
_Flowers_ terminal. _Calyx_ campanulate; lobes narrowly lanceolate,
acute, densely pubescent. _Corolla_ twisted in bud; 1-1·5 cm. long,
cylindric, pubescent; lobes 1·5 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, obovate,
narrowed into a distinct claw, pale pink with dark-red markings. Fruit
6-8 cm. long, spindle-shaped, pubenulous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 21.--Fig. 1, plant much reduced; Fig. 2, calyx; Fig. 3,
     stamen; Fig. 4, style and stigma.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _22._

K. A. Lansdell del.

PROTEA ABYSSINICA.]


PLATE 22.

PROTEA ABYSSINICA.

_Transvaal, Rhodesia._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

PROTEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 169.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Protea abyssinica=, _Willd. Sp. Pl._ vol. i. p. 522; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v.
sect. 1, p. 581.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Protea illustrated here is a very common species on the hillsides in
the neighbourhood of Pretoria. It sometimes attains a height of 15 feet,
is much branched, and has no distinct trunk. We have no record of the
species occurring further south, but it certainly extends into Rhodesia,
and perhaps--though we have some doubt on this point--into Abyssinia.
The species was first described by the botanist Willdenow, under the
present specific name in 1797, and he based his description on a figure
which appeared in Bruce’s _Travels to discover the Source of the Nile_,
which was published in 1790. The point as to whether the Transvaal plant
is the same species as that figured by Bruce needs further
investigation.

The specimens from which the figure was made were collected by Miss I.
C. Verdoorn at Waterkloof, near Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ 7-15·5 cm. long, ·8-2·2 cm.
broad, narrowly oblong-lanceolate or lanceolate, subacute or obtuse,
narrowing to the base, coriaceous, glabrous. _Inflorescence_, 6·3 cm.
long, and about 6·3 cm. in diameter when expanded, narrowed into a short
scaly stipe. _Involucral-bracts_ 11-seriate, silky; the inner oblong,
concave, shorter than the flowers. _Perianth_ with three small teeth at
the apex, densely hairy. _Ovary_ covered with a dense tuft of long
hairs; style 4·5 cm. long, more or less curved; stigma slightly bent at
the junction with the style.

       *       *       *       *       *

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _23._

K. A. Lansdell del.

BOLUSANTHUS SPECIOSUS, HARMS.]


PLATE 23.

BOLUSANTHUS SPECIOSUS.

_Transvaal, Rhodesia, Portuguese East Africa._

       *       *       *       *       *

LEGUMINOSAE. Tribe SOPHOREAE.

BOLUSANTHUS, _Harms in Fedde Repert. Nov. Sp._ vol. ii. p. 14 (1906).

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bolusanthus speciosus=, _Harms. l.c._

_Lonchocarpus speciosus_, _Bolus in Journ. Linn. Soc._ vol. xxv. p. 161
(1889).

       *       *       *       *       *

This remarkable and handsome leguminous plant was collected by the late
Dr. Bolus near the Komati River Drift in 1886, and described by him as
_Lonchocarpus speciosus_. Dr. Harms of Berlin, when examining a
collection of Rhodesian plants, came across the same species on which he
founded the genus _Bolusanthus_. The free stamens would indicate that it
is not a species of _Lonchocarpus_.

Our illustration was made from material collected by Dr. Pole Evans at
Chunies Poort, Transvaal, in October, 1919. The tree, which frequently
reaches a height of 30-40 feet, is locally known as “Van Wyk’s Hout,” or
“Wild Wisteria.” It is frequent along the northern foothills of the
Zoutpansberg range of mountains and in the low veld bush country along
the Selati River. When in full bloom it is one of the most beautiful
sights seen in the veld, and is a species which should certainly be
introduced into cultivation.

DESCRIPTION:--Tree up to 30-40 ft. high. _Branchlets_ pubescent.
_Leaves_ 10-27 cm. long; leaflets petiolate; petiole 5 mm. long; leaflet
2·5-7·5 cm. long, ·5-2·5 cm. broad, ovate-elliptic or lanceolate, very
often sub-falcate, long-acuminate, acute, oblique at the base, villous
when young, becoming pubescent with age. _Inflorescence_ a raceme 14-20
cm. long; rachis pubescent. _Pedicels_ up to 2 cm. long, pubescent.
_Calyx_ 7 mm. long, densely tomentose. _Corolla_ dark blue; vexillum 1·5
cm. long, about 1·3 cm. broad, obovate; alae 1·3 cm. long, carina as
long as the alae. _Stamens_ free. _Ovary_ linear, densely pubescent.
_Fruit_ up to 7 cm. long, 1-1·2 cm. broad, linear-oblong.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 23.--Fig. 1, branch with flowers; Fig. 2, leaf; Fig. 3,
     legumes; Fig. 4, calyx; Fig. 5, vexillum; Fig. 6, alae; Fig. 7,
     carina; Fig. 8, ovary.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _24._

K. A. Lansdell del.

ACOKANTHERA SPECTABILIS, HOOK. F.]


PLATE 24.

ACOKANTHERA SPECTABILIS.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

APOCYNACEAE. Tribe CARISSEAE.

ACOKANTHERA, _G. Don._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p.
696.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Acokanthera spectabilis=, _Hook. f. Bot. Mag._ t. 6359; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
4, sect. 1, p. 501.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above figure in the _Botanical Magazine_ was published in 1878, and
together with the description which accompanied it was the first
recognition that the so-called “Gift Boom” of the Eastern Province
consisted of two distinct species. The plant from which the figure in
the _Botanical Magazine_ was made, flowered at Kew Gardens in 1878. Mr.
T. R. Sim states that he cannot distinguish _A. spectabilis_, Hook. from
_A. venenata_, G. Don., but regards it as an eastern coastal form. The
plant is reputed to be extremely poisonous, and as the fruits are so
attractive-looking, it makes the species also a dangerous one. In habit
our plant is an evergreen shrub which lends itself to cultivation in the
shrubbery; the flowers are very fragrant, and even in fruit the shrub
does not lose its beauty, as the dark purple fruits show up
conspicuously against the green leaves. The specimen figured here was
presented by Mr. J. W. Wickens from the Garden of the Union Buildings,
Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--Shrub 4-10 ft. high. _Branches_ glabrous. _Leaves_ shortly
petioled; petioles 6 mm. long; lamina 7-10 cm. long, 2·2-4 cm. broad,
elliptic or elliptic-lanceolate, shortly acuminate, acute, narrowed at
the base, glabrous, with the mid-rib distinct below and sunken above.
_Flowers_ in many-flowered clusters. _Calyx_ 5-lobed almost to the base,
pubescent. _Corolla-tube_ 2 cm. long, narrowly cylindric, pubescent
outside, hairy within at the throat; lobes 4 mm. long, 3 mm. broad,
elliptic, rounded at the apex. Anthers ovate in outline, with a few
hairs at the apex. Style 1·4 mm. long, cylindric; stigma subglobose,
with a few hairs at the apex.

[_A. spectabilis_ is very easily distinguished from _A. venenata_ by its
longer petioles, usually larger size, and less elliptic shape and
different venation of its leaves, the veins (at least in the dried
state) being far less prominent and less ascending than they are in _A.
venenata_, and the flowers are much larger, the corolla-tube of _A.
spectabilis_ being 14-20 mm. long, whilst those of _A. venenata_ are
only 8-12 mm. long. Dried specimens show no intermediates.--N. E.
BROWN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 24.--Fig. 1, calyx; Fig. 2, corolla in section; Fig. 3,
     stamen; Fig. 4, stigma.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _25._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CYRTANTHUS SANGUINEUS, HOOK.]


PLATE 25.

CYRTANTHUS SANGUINEUS.

_Cape Province, Transkei, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyrtanthus sanguineus=, _Hook. in Bot. Mag._ t. 5218; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi.
p. 227.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species was imported into England from Kaffraria by Messrs.
Backhouse, and presented by them to the Horticultural Society of London
in 1846. Two years later, in the _Journal_ of the Society, Dr. Lindley
described the plant, and the description was accompanied by a woodcut.
In 1860 a plant flowered in the greenhouse at Kew, and was figured and
described in the _Botanical Magazine_, t. 5218, by Hooker. The specimens
from which the present illustration was made were gathered by Miss K. A.
Lansdell at Krantzkloof, Natal. The plant is known as the “Kei Lily.”

DESCRIPTION:--Bulb about 4·5 cm. long, ovoid, produced into a distinct
neck, with parchment-like scales. Leaves 1-4, contemporary with the
flowers, 22-30 cm. long, ·5-2 cm. broad, linear, obtuse, narrowed more
or less suddenly in the lowermost third to form a petiole, glabrous.
_Peduncle_ 12-26 cm. long, bearing 1-2 flowers. _Spathes_ two, 4-6·5 cm.
long, tapering into a long appendage from a broadened base. _Pedicels_
up to 2 cm. long, glabrous. _Perianth-tube_ 4-6 cm. long, campanulate in
the upper half, cylindric in the lower half; lobes 4 cm. long, 1·8 cm.
broad, ovate, acuminate, acute, with the apices of the outer lobes
inflexed and forming a small hood. _Stigmas_ with minute papillae on
their inner faces.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 25.--Fig. 1, portion of apex of perianth-lobe; Fig. 2, upper
     portion of style showing stigmas.

     F.S.P.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _26._

K. A. Lansdell del.

STAPELIA GETTLEFFII, POTT.]


PLATE 26.

STAPELIA GETTLEFFII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe STAPELIEAE.

STAPELIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 784.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Stapelia Gettleffii=, _Pott in Ann. Transvaal Mus._ vol. iii. p. 226, t.
13 (1913).

       *       *       *       *       *

Lovers of our South African succulents will welcome this plate of a new
Transvaal _Stapelia_, discovered by Mr. G. F. Gettleffi at Louis
Trichardt in the Zoutpansberg District. It is closely allied to
_Stapelia hirsuta_, which occurs in the Western Province of the Cape,
but the flowers are larger, the cilia longer, and the rudimentary leaves
are more developed. The illustration given here was made from specimens
growing on the rockeries of the Division of Botany, Pretoria, but there
is no record of the locality from which the original plants came. In
1916 a coloured illustration of the species appeared in the _Botanical
Magazine_ (t. 8681), made from a specimen which flowered in the Royal
Botanic Gardens, Kew, in June 1915, which was sent to England by Mr. N.
S. Pillans. Mr. Pillans’ specimens came from Palapye Road, near
Mafeking.

DESCRIPTION:--A succulent herb 10-20 cm. high. _Stems_ decumbent,
4-angled, velvety-pubescent. _Leaves_ rudimentary, ·3-1·3 cm. long,
linear-lanceolate, acute, velvety-pubescent. _Flowers_ 1-3 together near
the base of the stem; pedicels velvety. _Sepals_ velvety. _Corolla_
8·5-15 cm. in diameter; disc purple, clothed with long soft hairs; lobes
barred with transverse yellow and purple lines, and ciliate with long
whitish and purple hairs, velvety on the back. Outer corona-lobes 7 mm.
long, lanceolate with a subulate-acuminate recurved dark purple tip;
inner corona-lobes ·9-1·3 cm. long, subulate, with a 1-3-toothed broad
dorsal wing.

[As received from South Africa and as grown in England the stems of all
the plants seen are erect, being decumbent only at the basal part as in
other species of this genus. I have never seen them entirely prostrate
as here represented. Locality may cause the difference.--N. E. BROWN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 26.--Fig. 1, corona; Fig. 2, pollinia; Fig. 3, upper portion
     of stem; Fig. 4, stem with flowers; Fig. 5, follicles.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _27._

K. A. Lansdell del.

STREPTOCARPUS DUNNII, HOOK. f.]


PLATE 27.

STREPTOCARPUS DUNNII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

GESNERACEAE. Tribe CYRTANDREAE.

STREPTOCARPUS, _Lindl._; _Benth. et Hook. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 1023.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Streptocarpus Dunnii=, _Hook. f. Bot. Mag._ t. 6903; _Fl. Cap._ iv. sect.
2, p. 442.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species of _Streptocarpus_, which belongs to a section of the genus
characterised by the development of one leaf only, was first brought to
the notice of horticulturists in 1884 by Mr. E. G. Dunn, who sent seeds
to Kew from Spitzkop in the Transvaal.

The seeds germinated freely, and in May and June of 1886 the plants were
a feature of the Succulent House at Kew. The genus _Streptocarpus_ is
well represented in South Africa, and at least 24 distinct species are
known.

Our illustration was made from plants grown by Mr. C. E. Gray, Pretoria,
from specimens collected by Dr. Pole Evans on Mr. Geo. Heys’ farm,
Weltevreden, Machadodorp, where it grows on rocks at the side of a
stream.

DESCRIPTION:--Leaf sometimes up to 1 m. long and 45 cm. broad, hairy
beneath, sometimes shaggy on the upper surface, with crenate margins.
_Peduncles_ up to 15 cm. long, terete, pilose, bearing many flowers
arranged more or less in a cymose manner. _Calyx_ divided almost to the
base; lobes 5 mm. long, lanceolate or linear-lanceolate, subacute,
ciliate. _Corolla-tube_ 2·2 cm. long, pubescent in bud, becoming more or
less glabrous with age, gradually widening from the base upwards; lobes
4 mm. long, 4 mm. broad, more or less transversely oblong, broadly
rounded at the apex. _Style_ densely pilose below.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 27.--Fig. 1, inflorescence; Fig. 2, plant reduced

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _28._

K. A. Lansdell del.

SENECIO STAPELIAEFORMIS, P. HILL. _sp. nov._]


PLATE 28.

SENECIO STAPELIAEFORMIS.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITAE. Tribe SENECIONIDEAE.

SENECIO, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 446.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Senecio stapeliaeformis=, _Phill. sp. nov._

     _Caudex_ 7-25 cm. altus, carnosus, 4-7-angulosus. _Folia_ 2-5 mm.
     longa, erecta, subulata, emarcida. _Pedunculus_ 2 cm. longus,
     simplex, monocephalus, teres, glaber. _Capitulum_ discoideum,
     coccineum. _Bractae_ involucri, 1·5 cm. longae, 1 mm. latae,
     lineares, apice obtusae ciliataeque. _Receptaculum_ 3 mm. latum,
     planum. _Corollae_ tubus 2 cm. longus, cylindricus, glaber; lobi
     3·5 mm. longi, ·75 mm. lati, lineares, apice obtusi. _Stamina_
     inclusa; filamenta 6 mm. longa; antherae 2·5 mm. longae, lineares,
     apice appendice lineare instructae. _Ovarium_ 2·5 mm. longum,
     glabrum; stylus 2 mm. longus, glaber, lobis 4 mm. longis
     linearibus. _Pappus_ 1·6 cm. longus.

     Transvaal: Lydenburg. _Carl Jeppe in National Herbarium,_ 1272.
     Pruizen, Potgeiters Rust, under bushes, _Burtt Davy_, 2203.

       *       *       *       *       *

The specimens from which our figure was made were collected by Mr. Carl
Jeppe in the Lydenburg District, Transvaal, and flowered in the Garden
of the Division of Botany, Pretoria, in September, 1919.

It is closely allied to _Senecio pendula_, Sch. Bip., a native of
Somaliland and Arabia, but differs in the erect, angled stems.

The stems resemble those of a _Stapelia_ to such an extent that it was
thought to be a _Stapelia_ when received, and was planted out in the
_Stapelia_ collection. This species will make a very welcome addition to
the South African rockeries.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ 7-25 cm. long, simple, more rarely branched, thick
and fleshy, 4-7-angled, with the angles compressed and toothed, each
tooth tipped with an erect, slender, awl-like leaf 2-5 mm. long,
withering and becoming hardened. _Peduncle_ often solitary and terminal,
sometimes there is also an axilliary one on the stem, but then only the
uppermost appears to develop; 2 cm. long, bearing one flower-head,
terete, with 3-4 of the subulate leaves or bracts, glabrous.
_Flower-head_ solitary, discoid, scarlet-red. _Involucral-scales_ in a
single row of 10-12, more or less concrete, 1·5 cm. long, 1 mm. broad,
linear, obtuse, ciliated at the apex, brick-red. _Receptacle_ 3 mm. in
diameter, flat. _Florets_ all hermaphrodite. _Corolla-tube_ 2 cm. long,
cylindric, glabrous, scarlet-red above, colourless below; lobes 3·5 mm.
long, 0·75 mm. broad, linear, obtuse, scarlet-red. _Stamens_ inserted
about halfway down the corolla-tube; filaments 6 mm. long, filiform,
becoming linear for 1·5 mm. below the anthers; anthers 2·5 mm. long,
linear, blunt at the base, tipped at the apex with a linear appendage
1·5 mm. long. _Ovary_ 2·5 mm. long, linear in outline, glabrous; style 2
mm. long, cylindric, glabrous; style-arms 4 mm. long, linear, tipped
with a bristly cone. _Pappus_ of white hairs 1·6 cm. long, distantly
barbellate. _Fruit_ not seen.

[A few years before the war a plant of this species was sent by Mr. J.
Burtt Davy to Kew Gardens, where it flowered annually, but has since
died.--N. E. BROWN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 28.--Fig. 1, flower (enlarged); Fig. 2, style-arms; Fig. 3,
     stamens; Fig. 4, cross-section of stem.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _29._

K. A. Lansdell del.

NYMPHAEA STELLATA WITH.]


PLATE 29.

NYMPHAEA STELLATA.

_Cape Province, Transvaal, Natal, Rhodesia._

       *       *       *       *       *

NYMPHAEACEAE. Tribe NYMPHAEAE.

NYMPHAEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 46.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Nymphaea stellata=, _Willd. Sp. Pl._ vol. ii. p. 1153; _Fl. Cap._ vol. i.
p. 14.

       *       *       *       *       *

A common water plant in many of our South African rivers and vleis, and
it is not surprising that such a handsome species soon found its way to
cultivators in Europe. Masson, about the year 1792, appears to have
first introduced it into England by forwarding specimens from the Cape
to the Royal Gardens at Kew. It was not long before coloured plates
appeared in the botanical publications of the day, and the first of
these was published in 1801 in the _Botanical Magazine_ and about the
same time in Andrews’ _Botanist’s Repository_. A second figure again
appeared in the _Botanical Magazine_ about 18 years later. The species,
commonly known as the “Blue Water Lily” (Zulu “i-Ziba”), is easy of
cultivation, and is found in most garden ponds in South Africa. Our
illustration was made from specimens growing in the aquarium of the
Natal Herbarium, Durban.

DESCRIPTION:--An aquatic plant with a submerged rhizome from which the
floating leaves and flowers are produced. _Rhizome_ 4-5 cm. in diameter,
black and spongy. _Leaves_ about 6 to each rhizome; petiole long or
short according to the depth of the water, terete, striate, thickly
clothed with transparent hairs; lamina green above, brownish beneath, up
to 30 cm. long and 20-26 cm. broad, orbicular or elliptic, rounded at
the apex, and with a deep acute triangular notch at the base, with
entire or sometimes wavy margins, and prominent veins beneath, glabrous.
_Peduncles_ longer than the petioles, raising the flower well above the
surface of the water. _Sepals_ 4, green outside, blue within, 4-6 cm.
long, 1·5-2 cm. broad, ovate-oblong, acuminate. _Petals_ numerous, about
4 cm. long, 1 cm. broad, ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, blue. _Torus_ thick,
fleshy. _Stamens_ numerous, in several rows; filaments flattened; the
outer longer than the inner, and ½-⅔ the length of the petals; anthers
yellow, with a long linear blue appendage at the apex. _Carpels_ many,
inserted in the torus; stigma arcuate, obtuse. _Fruit_ a many-seeded
berry. _Seeds_ spongy.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 29.--Fig. 1, torus; Fig. 2, plant reduced.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _30._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CEROPEGIA MEYERI DENE.]


PLATE 30.

CEROPEGIA MEYERI.

_Cape Province, Transvaal, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe CEROPEGIEAE.

CEROPEGIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 779.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ceropegia Meyeri=, _Decne. in DC. Prodr._ vol. viii. p. 645; _Fl. Cap._
vol. iv sect. 1, p. 828.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species was first collected by Drège between the Bashee River and
Morley, in Tembuland, about the year 1831, but the species has been
found by several collectors since then. Its altitudinal range of
distribution is wide, as it has been recorded by the late Dr. Wood from
the sub-tropical climate of Durban and from Oliver’s Hoek Pass on the
Drakensbergen, which is occasionally covered with snow in the winter
months. The plant is a very ornamental twiner, easily cultivated, and
well worth the attention of horticulturists. The accompanying
illustration was made from specimens growing in the garden of the Natal
Herbarium at Durban.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ a flattened tuber. _Stem_ herbaceous, twining,
up to 10 metres long, pubescent. _Leaves_ petioled; lamina 1·7-2·8 cm.
long, 3-5·9 cm. broad, cordate-ovate or lanceolate-ovate, acute,
somewhat acuminate, cordate or rounded at the base, more or less
pubescent or rarely subglabrous on both sides, with the margins
variously toothed or lobed. _Petiole_ 1-4 cm. long, pubescent.
_Inflorescence_ 2-4-flowered, cymose, sessile or subsessile at the
nodes. _Pedicels_ 0·6-1·1 cm. long, villous. _Sepals_ 8-11 mm. long, 1
mm. broad at the base, subulate, pubescent. _Corolla-tube_ whitish at
the lowermost third, streaked with purple lines above, 2·5-3·1 cm. long,
bottle-shaped, inflated and cylindric-oblong in the basal two-thirds,
and narrowed into a cylindric neck above, then abruptly dilated at the
mouth, glabrous without and within except at the throat; lobes almost
black, connate at the tips, 1-1·2 cm. long, 3 mm. broad at the base,
linear, pilose, with reflexed margins. _Outer corona-lobes_ white,
ascending, 1 mm. long, deltoid, acute, glabrous; inner corona lobes
connivent at the base, then slightly divergent, and again connivent at
the tips, white above, black below, 2 mm. long, linear or slightly
spathulate-linear, obtuse. _Follicles_ erect, sub-parallel, 8-10 cm.
long, tapering into a beak, glabrous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 30.--Fig. 1, calyx (enlarged); Fig. 2, corona; Fig. 3, a
     follicle.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _31._

K. A. Lansdell del.

MORÆA IRIDIOIDES, LINN.]


PLATE 31.

MORAEA IRIDIOIDES.

_Cape Province, Transvaal, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDEAE. Tribe MORAEEAE.

MORAEA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 688.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Moraea iridioides=, _Linn. Mant._ 28; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 25.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is one of the largest and most handsome species in the genus and is
frequently cultivated in South African gardens. Thunberg appears to have
been the first collector of this plant; he gathered his specimens near
the Zeekoe River in Humansdorp Division about 1772, but the species was
known in England before then, as there is a record of Miller having it
in cultivation in 1758. The first figure of the species appeared in the
_Botanical Magazine_ in 1804 and it has been figured several times
since. The present illustration was made from specimens growing in the
garden of the Natal Herbarium, Durban.

DESCRIPTION:--A perennial plant with short underground rhizomes.
_Leaves_ crowded in dense fan-shaped basal rosettes, 0·6-1·3 metres
long, 1-2 cm. broad, linear, acute, equitant at the base, glabrous.
_Peduncles_ equalling or exceeding the leaves. _Inflorescence_
corymbose. _Spathe-valves_ 2, about 6·5 cm. long, obtuse, tightly
folded; the outer smaller than the inner. _Perianth-segments_ 5-6 cm.
long, 2-3 cm. broad, obovate, obtuse, clawed at the base; the 3 outer
segments with an orange-yellow keel, densely pilose at the base; the 3
inner segments narrower, with dark markings above the claw. _Ovary_
ellipsoid. _Stigmas_ purple, lanceolate, 2-lobed. _Fruit_ 5 cm. long,
1·7 cm. in diameter, ellipsoid; valves coriaceous. _Seeds_ discoid.

       *       *       *       *       *

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _32._

K. A. Lansdell del.

HAEMANTHUS NATALENSIS, PAPPE.]


PLATE 32.

HAEMANTHUS NATALENSIS.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

HAEMANTHUS, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 730.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Haemanthus natalensis=, _Pappe ex Hook. in Bot. Mag._ t. 5378; _Fl. Cap._
vol. vi. p. 232.

       *       *       *       *       *

The late Dr. Pappe first brought this species to the notice of Kew as an
undescribed South African plant, and not long afterwards (1862), Dr.
Sanderson sent bulbs from Natal to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, which
flowered the following year. An excellent figure of the plant appeared
in the _Botanical Magazine_ of the same year. The species appears to be
fairly common in Natal, but the only Cape Province record we have is
supplied by a specimen collected by Mr. W. Tyson at Kokstad, East
Griqualand, 1883. The present illustration was made from specimens
collected by Miss K. A. Lansdell at “Stella Bush” near Durban. It is
popularly known as the “Blood Flower,” “Snake Lily,” and “April Fool.”
It is reputed to be poisonous, but is used medicinally by the natives of
Natal who know it as “Indumbe-ka-Hloile.”

DESCRIPTION:--An erect plant about 1 metre high. _Bulb_ 2-7·5 cm. in
diameter, usually globose. _Stem_ about 1 metre high, closely covered
with leaves above and with a few scale-leaves at the base. _Leaves_
sub-erect, 32 cm. long, 8-9 cm. broad, acute, narrowed at the base,
glabrous, shining; the sheathing petiole of the lowermost leaves with
reddish-brown spots, and the margin round the apex coloured
reddish-brown. _Peduncle_ lateral, from the base of the stem, generally
shorter than the stem, semi-terete, smooth and glabrous. _Inflorescence_
a many-flowered umbel. _Involucral-bracts_ 7-8, vandyke red to blackish
red-purple (R.C.S.), 6·5-7·5 cm. long, 2-5 cm. broad, oblong,
sub-acuminate, rounded or obtuse at the apex, glabrous. _Floral-bracts_
about 4 cm. long, 1-2 mm. broad, linear. _Flowers_ scarlet (R.C.S.).
_Pedicels_ 1·5-5 cm. long, terete, glabrous. _Perianth-tube_ 1 cm.
long, 0·9 cm. in diameter, campanulate, glabrous; lobes 1·2 cm. long,
linear, obtuse and recurved at the apex, with a tuft of hairs on each
alternate lobe, otherwise glabrous. _Stamens_ exserted, arising at the
throat of the perianth-tube; filaments usually about 1·6 cm. long,
hermosa pink (R.C.S.); anthers yellow. _Ovary_ 6 mm. long, ellipsoid;
style longer than the stamens, hermosa pink (R.C.S.); stigma minute,
globose. _Fruit_ a bright-red berry about 1 cm. in diameter,
sub-globose, 1-3 seeded.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 32.--Fig. 1, plant reduced; Fig. 2, flower, with bract; Fig.
     3, stamen, showing attachment to segment of the perianth.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _33._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CYRTANTHUS MᶜKENII, Hook. f.]


PLATE 33.

CYRTANTHUS MCKENII.

_Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyrtanthus McKenii=, _Hook. fil. in Gard. Chron._, 1869, p. 641, with
fig.; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 225; _Wood, Natal Plants_, vol. i. t. 51.

       *       *       *       *       *

The species of _Cyrtanthus_, which with one exception are confined to
South Africa, have always received notice from gardeners. Our plant was
described in 1869 from specimens sent to Europe by Mr. McKen, and a
coloured drawing appeared soon after (1873) in one of the illustrated
botanical publications. As far as our records go, this species is
confined to Natal, where it is known as the “Ifafa Lily.” The specimens
from which our illustration was made were gathered by Miss K. A.
Lansdell on the banks of the Ifafa River near Port Shepstone, the
original locality in which Mr. McKen first discovered the species. The
flowers are strongly scented.

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ 3-4 cm. in diameter, ovoid; tunics brown,
membranous. _Leaves_ 2-6, erect, contemporary with the flowers, 20-30
cm. long, 0·9-2 cm. broad, linear, obtuse, narrowed to the base,
glabrous. _Peduncle_ reddish-brown near the base, longer than the
leaves, sub-terete, hollow. _Inflorescence_ a 4-10-flowered umbel.
_Spathe-valves_ 2, green, spotted with reddish-brown marks when young,
at length withering, 2·5-3·5 cm. long, 4-7 mm. broad, lanceolate, acute.
_Flowers_ sub-erect, pure white with yellowish throats. _Floral-bracts_
linear. _Pedicle_ 0·8-1·5 cm. long, terete. _Perianth-tube_ 3-3·5 cm.
long, 7-9 mm. in diameter at the throat, gradually widening from the
base upwards; lobes spreading, 6-7 mm. long, 5-6 mm. broad, ovate, the 3
outer cucullate at the apex; the 3 inner emarginate. _Stamens_
sub-sessile, in 2 whorls below the throat of the perianth tube; anthers
oblong. _Ovary_ sub-trigonous; style exserted; stigmas spreading,
oblong-linear, tufted at the apex. _Fruit_ a trigonous capsule.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 33.--Fig. 1, leaf and flowers, natural size; Fig. 2, perianth
     laid open; Fig. 3, apex of style showing stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _34._

S. Gower del.

WITSENIA MAURA, Thunb.]


PLATE 34.

WITSENIA MAURA.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

IRIDACEAE. Tribe SISYRINCHIEAE.

WITSENIA, _Thunb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 701.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Witsenia maura=, _Thunb. Nov. Gen._ pl. p. 34; _Fl. Cap._ vol. vi. p. 46.

       *       *       *       *       *

This interesting plant, the only species known in the genus, was first
found by Dr. Carl Thunberg at Noordhoek and False Bay on the Cape
Peninsula and described by him in 1782. It appears to be confined to
damp habitats in the Cape Province, and has been found by the late Dr.
Bolus at Houw Hoek in Caledon Division. It has also been recorded from
the Tradouw Mountains in Swellendam Division, and this year (1920) Mr.
T. P. Stokoe has discovered the plant on the Klein River Mountains near
Caledon. It is a rare species and would only interest enthusiastic
cultivators on account of its rarity.

We are indebted to Mr. Stokoe for the living specimens from which this
plate was prepared. The plant is known locally as “Waaiertje.”

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ woody. _Leaves_ distichous, about 18 cm. long, 5-7
mm. broad, linear, tapering to an acute point, amplexi-caul, glabrous.
_Flowers_ in terminal heads. _Bracts_ 4·5 cm. long, boat-shaped, shorter
than the flowers. _Perianth-tube_ 2·7 cm. long, brown below, becoming
blue-black above; lobes 1·4 cm. long, 5·5 mm. broad, ovate-lanceolate,
obtuse, densely tomentose with yellow hairs outside, glabrous within,
with a tuft of yellow hairs at the apex of the inner segments and
marginal hairs round the apex of the outer segments. _Stamens_ inserted
near the throat of the perianth-tube; filaments 5 mm. long, linear and
slightly dilated at the base; anthers 6 mm. long, linear. _Ovary_ small;
style 4 cm. long, slightly bifid at the apex.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 34.--Fig. 1, plant natural size; Fig. 2, unopened flower;
     Fig. 3, lobes of perianth; Figs. 4 and 5, stamens; Fig. 6, ovary
     and style; Fig. 7, tip of style, showing the three stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _35._

S. Gower del.

CYRTANTHUS OBLIQUUS, Ait.]


PLATE 35.

CYRTANTHUS OBLIQUUS.

_Cape Province, Natal._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol iii. p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyrtanthus obliquus=, _Ait.; Hort. Kew._ vol. i. p. 414; _Fl. Cap._ vol.
vi. p. 219; _Wood, Natal Plants_, vol. iv. t. 391.

       *       *       *       *       *

This beautiful _Cyrtanthus_ was described by Aiton in 1789, probably
from plants collected in South Africa by Masson, who sent specimens of
this species to England in 1774. The fact that it has been so frequently
figured is an indication that it has appealed largely to
horticulturists. Jacquin first produced a coloured plate in 1797 and the
last figure we know of in botanical literature is that quoted above.

The specimens from which the present plate was prepared flowered in the
Gardens of the Division of Botany, Pretoria, from bulbs gathered on the
mountains at Bethelsdorp near Port Elizabeth by Dr. I. B. Pole Evans.

In Natal this plant is known as “Justifina” or “Sore-eye flower” by the
natives, who use it medicinally, as “Matoonga.”

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ globose, about 10 cm. in diameter, with a short
neck about 4 cm. long, and thick cylindrical roots from the base; outer
tunics membranous. _Leaves_ 18 cm. long, 4 cm. broad, strap-shaped,
obtuse, glabrous. _Peduncle_ 28 cm. long, 1·3 cm. in diameter at the
base, cylindric, tapering slightly towards the apex, hollow, glabrous.
_Inflorescence_ an umbel of 6 flowers. _Bracts_ 3 cm. long, 1 cm. broad,
ovate, sub-acuminate, acute. _Pedicels_ 2 cm. long, cylindric, glabrous.
_Flowers_ pendulous. _Perianth-tube_ 4·5 cm. long, 2 cm. in diameter at
the throat, funnel-shaped; outer lobes 2·5 cm. long, 1·4 cm. broad,
oblong, slightly mucronate; inner lobes 2·4 cm. long, 1·7 cm. broad,
obovate, obtuse, green, passing into yellow and red at their base.
_Stamens_ arising from near the base of the perianth-tube; filaments 3
cm. long, cylindric; anthers 4 mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ sub-globose, 5
mm. long, about 6 mm. in diameter; style 7·9 cm. long, cylindric; stigma
faintly 3-lobed.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 35.--Fig. 1, plant, much reduced; Fig. 2, leaf and flowers,
     natural size; Fig. 3, perianth laid open; Fig. 4, apex of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _36._

S. Gower del.

MIMETES PALUSTRIS, Kn.]


PLATE 36.

MIMETES PALUSTRIS.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

MIMETES, _Salisb._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 171.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Mimetes palustris=, _Knight, Prot._ p. 66, _excl. syn. Boerh.; Fl. Cap._
vol. v. sect. 1, p. 649.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have much pleasure in figuring this species, one of the many
botanical rarities which have recently been brought to the notice of
South African botanists by Mr. T. P. Stokoe.

Mr. Stokoe collected the specimens in August, 1920, between Hermanus and
Stanford in the Caledon District. They were growing on damp slopes of
shallow soil overlaying quartzite, with a southern aspect. In the
locality the plant is extremely rare.

As far as we are aware this is the first record of the species since it
was collected by Niven.

The common species of _Mimetes_ (_M. lyrigera_, Knight) is known as the
“Rooi Stompie,” and as the above species is confined to damp habitats we
propose the name “Water Stompie” for it.

DESCRIPTION:--A small shrub about 24 cm. high. _Branches_ pilose.
_Leaves_ more or less imbricated, 1·7-2·5 cm. long, 7-9 mm. broad, the
leaves subtending the flowers broader, elliptic-lanceolate, sub-acute,
villous, ciliate with long hairs on the margins. _Heads_ longer than the
leaves, 3-5 flowered. _Outer involucral bracts_ about 2·2 cm. long,
ovate-lanceolate, acute, villous. _Perianth_ hairy; the limb densely
setose. _Style_ with a dilated ring at the base of the stigma, glabrous.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 36.--Fig. 1, plant natural size; Fig. 2, a single flower;
     Fig. 3, a single perianth segment; Fig. 4, limb of perianth; Fig.
     5, style; Fig. 6, stigma.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _37._

S. Gower del.

CYRTANTHUS ROTUNDILOBUS, N.E. BR.]


PLATE 37.

CYRTANTHUS ROTUNDILOBUS.[C]

_Transkei._

       *       *       *       *       *

AMARYLLIDACEAE. Tribe AMARYLLEAE.

CYRTANTHUS, _Ait._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. iii. p. 729.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cyrtanthus rotundilobus=, _N.E. Br. sp. nov._

     CYRTANTHUS _rotundilobus_; _Bulbus_ ovoideus, 3 cm. diametro, in
     collo productus. _Folia_ 4, erecto-recurva, 16-30 cm. longa, 1·7
     cm. lata, lineari-lanceolata, apice attenuata, subtus carinata,
     glabra. _Pedunculus_ circa 14 cm. longus, teres, solidus, glaber.
     _Umbella_ 9-11-flora. _Bracteæ_ 2·5 cm. longae, ovatæ acuminatae.
     _Pedicelli_ 1·7 cm. longi, teretes, glabri. _Perianthium_ plus
     minusve nutans rubro-cinnabarinum; tubus 2·5 cm. longus,
     infundibularis, ad apicem 8-9 mm. diametro; lobi circa 7 mm. longi
     et 5 mm. lati, elliptici vel suborbiculari, minute apiculati.
     _Stamina_ ad faucem perianthii inserta, biseriata, superioria
     subexserta; antherae 4 mm. longae. _Ovarium_ 4 mm. longum,
     ellipsoideum; stylus 2·2 cm. longus, filiformis, stigmatibus tribus
     minutis.--N. E. BROWN.

     =Transkei=, _Wickens_.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is not such a conspicuous plant as some other species of the genus,
yet the brilliant colouring of the perianth is sufficient to warrant
attention being given to this species in collections.

Our plate was figured from specimens grown by Mr. Wickens from bulbs
collected in the Transkei, where it is known as the “Red Dobo-lily.”

DESCRIPTION:--_Bulb_ ovoid, 3 cm. in diameter, produced into a neck
about 3 cm. long, with fleshy cylindrical roots from the base. _Leaves_
4, 16-30 cm. long, 1·7 cm. broad, strap-shaped or linear-lanceolate,
tapering to the apex, keeled beneath, channelled above, glabrous.
_Peduncle_ arising at the side of the leaves, 14 cm. long, terete,
solid, glabrous. _Inflorescence_ an umbel of about 11 flowers. _Bracts_
2·5 cm. long, ovate, acuminate. _Pedicels_ 1·7 cm. long, terete,
glabrous. _Perianth-tube_ 2·5 cm. long, 6 mm. in diameter at the throat,
funnel-shaped, reddish-scarlet; lobes 5 mm. long, 5 mm. broad, elliptic
or sub-orbicular, with a minute apiculus; the 3 outer lobes with a
glandular structure at the apex. _Stamens_ inserted near the throat of
the perianth-tube; anthers in 2 rows, sessile, 4 mm. long. _Ovary_ 4 mm.
long, ellipsoid; style 2·2 cm. long, filiform; stigmas 3 linear.--E.
PERCY PHILLIPS.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 37.--Fig. 1, leaf and flowers, natural size; Fig. 2, bulb and
     base of leaves; Fig. 3, perianth laid open; Fig. 4, portion of
     style showing the stigmas.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _38._

S. Gower del.

OROTHAMNUS ZEYHERI, PAPPE.]


PLATE 38.

OROTHAMNUS ZEYHERI.

_Cape Province._

       *       *       *       *       *

PROTEACEAE. Tribe PROTEEAE.

OROTHAMNUS, _Pappe_; _Benth. et Hook. f._ vol. iii. p. 171 (under
Mimetes).

       *       *       *       *       *

=Orothamnus Zeyheri=, _Pappe in Bot. Mag._ t. 4357; _Fl. Cap._ vol. v.
sect. 1, p. 650.

       *       *       *       *       *

This species is another _rara avis_ of the Cape Flora. It was figured
for the first time in 1848 (_Botanical Magazine_ t. 4357) from a
painting sent by Dr. Pappe to Kew. Carl Zeyher discovered the species on
the Hottentots Holland Mountains, and for very many years afterwards it
remained unknown to botanists in the fresh state. Mr. E. J. Steer, of
Cape Town, some years ago purchased specimens from a coloured
flower-seller and photographed it, and this year (1920) it was met with
more than once exposed for sale among the wild flowers in Adderley
Street, Cape Town. Every effort of botanical collectors to discover the
locality in which the species grows has up to now proved unsuccessful,
and no information can be obtained from the coloured flower-pickers. The
plant has no local name as far as we have been able to ascertain, and we
propose the name “Zeyher’s Orothamnus” for this species.

Our plate was made from a fresh specimen bought in Cape Town by Mr. T.
P. Stokoe.

DESCRIPTION:--An erect shrub, 6-8 ft. high. _Branches_ pilose with long
hairs. _Leaves_ 1-2¼ in. long, ¾-1¼ in. broad, slightly imbricate,
obovate or oblanceolate-spathulate, with a very obtuse blackish apex,
slightly narrowing at the base, or rarely the upper leaves attenuated,
distinctly 5-6 nerved, rigidly sub-coriaceous, densely ciliate when
young, otherwise glabrous or more or less scantily pilose. _Heads_
sessile, 2-2½ in. long, many-flowered. _Involucral bracts_ petaloid,
4-5-seriate, 1¾-2 in. long, 4-12 lin. broad, spathulate-oblong, rounded
at the apex, many-nerved, membranous, pilose, ciliate, rose-red, the
outermost densely shaggy-pilose. _Perianth-tube_ 3 lin. long,
cylindric, pubescent; segments lemon-yellow, 1¼ in. long, linear,
pilose; limb 4 lin. long, linear scantily pilose. _Filaments_ swollen,
fused with the perianth; anthers 3½ lin. long, linear, with an ovate
obtuse apical gland ¼ lin. long. _Hypogynous scales_ 5-6 lin. long,
linear, obtuse, brown. _Style_ 1¾ in. long, grooved, glabrous; stigma 3½
lin. long, grooved, obtuse; ovary 1 lin. long, globose. Fruit 3 lin.
long, oblong, smooth and shining (ex. _Flora Capensis_).

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 38.--Fig. 1, portion of plant, natural size; Fig. 2, a single
     flower; Fig. 3, upper portion of a perianth-lobe showing a stamen;
     Fig. 4, apex of style.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _39._

K. A. Lansdell del.

CEROPEGIA RENDALLII, N.E. BR.]


PLATE 39.

CEROPEGIA RENDALLII.

_Transvaal._

       *       *       *       *       *

ASCLEPIADACEAE. Tribe CEROPEGIEAE.

CEROPEGIA, _Linn._; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. ii. p. 779.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ceropegia Rendallii=, _N.E. Br. in Kew Bull._, 1894, p. 100; _Fl. Cap._
vol. iv. sect. 1, p. 814.

       *       *       *       *       *

An exceedingly quaint and graceful little plant, and an acquisition to
the greenhouse.

Our illustration was made from a specimen collected by Dr. Ethel M.
Doidge at Onderstepoort, near Pretoria, and grown at the Division of
Botany. The locality is a new record for the species as hitherto it had
only been known from the Barberton and Lydenburg Districts.

The claw of the petal-lobes are united into a single column in the young
flowers but in the older flowers become separated.

The species was first described by Mr. N. E. Brown, in 1894, and is now
figured for the first time.

DESCRIPTION:--_Rootstock_ a flattened tuber, 2·5 cm. in diameter. _Stem_
twining, slender, glabrous. _Leaves_ 1·2-2·5 cm. long, 5-8 mm. broad,
linear or linear-oblong, somewhat fleshy, apiculate, glabrous, sometimes
with a slight ciliation on the margins. _Peduncles_ 1·5-2 cm. long,
slender, with 2 small bracts about the middle, 1-3 flowered. _Sepals_
subulate. _Corolla-tube_ 2 cm. long, globose at the base, contracted
into a funnel-shaped tube much dilated at the throat; lobes united into
an umbrella-shaped canopy supported on claws about 5 mm. long.
_Outer-corona_ about 1 mm. long, of 5 small pocket-like lobes, truncate
at the top or rising into a minute deltoid point at the dorsal angle,
inner coronal-lobes about 1 mm. long, falcate, recurved. _Follicles_
about 10 cm. long, 3 mm. in diameter, terete, tapering from about the
middle to a slightly dilated apex, glabrous, greenish or irregularly
striped with rupple-red.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 39.--Fig. 1, plant, natural size; Fig. 2, flower; Fig. 3,
     canopy in fully-opened flower seen from above; Fig. 4, side view of
     canopy in bud; Fig. 5, canopy in bud seen from above; Fig. 6,
     corona; Fig. 7, follicles.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.

[Illustration: _40._

K. A. Lansdell del.

SARCOCAULON RIGIDUM, SCHINZ.]


PLATE 40.

SARCOCAULON RIGIDUM.

_South-West Africa._

       *       *       *       *       *

GERANIACEAE. Tribe GERANIEAE.

SARCOCAULON, _Sweet_; _Benth. et Hook. f. Gen. Plant._ vol. i. p. 272.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Sarcocaulon rigidum=, _Schinz in Verh. Bot. Ver. Brand._, vol. xxix. p.
59, (1888).

       *       *       *       *       *

This remarkable plant, one of the so-called “Bushman’s Candles” or
“Candle Bush,” flowered in the garden of the Division of Botany,
Pretoria, in September, 1919. The specimens were collected by Major C.
W. Lewis at Aus in South-West Africa. It is very closely allied to _S.
Burmanni Sweet_.[D] We are indebted to the Director of the Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, for the determination.

The plant appears to do quite well in cultivation as specimens have
flowered and set mature fruit for two seasons at Pretoria.

DESCRIPTION:--_Stems_ very stout and smooth, with a waxy epidermis.
_Primary leaves_ with long petioles, which, after the blade falls off,
are hardened so as to form thorns 1·5-4 cm. long; lamina 1-1·6 cm. long,
5-9 mm. broad, obovate, cuneate at the base, retuse or sometimes
3-toothed at the apex, glaucous, glabrous; secondary leaves arising in
the axils of the primary leaves, sessile or sub-sessile, obovate,
cordate at the apex, cuneate at the base, entire. _Stipules_ 2 mm. long,
ovate-lanceolate, usually ciliate, deciduous. _Sepals_ 1·2 cm. long, 6
mm. broad, obovate-oblong, obtuse, bluntly mucronate and shortly bearded
at the apex, with membranous margins, concave, glabrous. _Petals_ 2·2
cm. long, 1·6 cm. broad, obovate, somewhat truncate at the apex,
glabrous, ciliate on the cuneate base. _Stamens_ 15, of two different
lengths; the filaments of the 10 shorter stamens not equalling the
styles, 7 mm. long, linear, tapering to the apex, ciliate below; the
filaments of the 5 long stamens exceeding the styles, 1·2 cm. long;
anthers 2 mm. long, oblong. _Ovary_ 3 mm. long, obovate in outline,
silky; styles cohering, 6 mm. long, silky; stigmas 5, 2 mm. long,
subterete, obtuse. _Carpels_ 1 cm. long, produced into a long awn
densely pilose in the upper half.

       *       *       *       *       *

     PLATE 40.--Fig. 1, sepal; Fig. 2, petal; Fig. 3, stamens, enlarged;
     Fig. 4, ovary and styles, enlarged; Fig. 5, transverse section of
     ovary, enlarged; Fig. 6, fruit.

     F.P.S.A., 1921.




INDEX TO VOLUME I.


       PLATE

ACOKANTHERA SPECTABILIS, 24

ADENIUM MULTIFLORUM, 16

AGAPANTHUS UMBELLATUS, 1

ALOE GLOBULIGEMMA, 2

ALOE PIENAARII, 17

ALOE PRETORIENSIS, 18

ARCTOTIS FOSTERI, 3


BOLUSANTHUS SPECIOSUS, 23


CEROPEGIA MEYERI, 30

CEROPEGIA RENDALLII, 39

CLERODENDRON TRIPHYLLUM, 19

CLIVIA MINIATA, 13

CRASSULA FALCATA, 12

CYRTANTHUS CONTRACTUS, 4

CYRTANTHUS MCKENII, 33

CYRTANTHUS OBLIQUUS, 35

CYRTANTHUS ROTUNDILOBUS, 37

CYRTANTHUS SANGUINEUS, 25


FREESIA SPARMANII _v._ FLAVA, 11


GARDENIA GLOBOSA, 14

GERBERA JAMESONI, 5

GLADIOLUS PSITTACINUS, var. Cooperi, 6

GLADIOLUS REHMANNI, 20


HAEMANTHUS NATALENSIS, 32


LEUCADENDRON STOKOEI. (MALE.), 7

LEUCADENDRON STOKOEI. (FEMALE.), 8


MIMETES PALUSTRIS, 36

MORAEA IRIDIOIDES, 31


NYMPHAEA STELLATA, 29


OROTHAMNUS ZEYHERI, 38


PACHYPODIUM SUCCULENTUM, 21

PROTEA ABYSSINICA, 22


RICHARDIA ANGUSTILOBA, 10

RICHARDIA REHMANNI, 15


SARCOCAULON RIGIDUM, 40

SENECIO STAPELIAEFORMIS, 28

STAPELIA GETTLEFFII, 26

STREPTOCARPUS DUNNII, 27


TULBAGHIA VIOLACEA, 9


WITSENIA MAURA, 34


FOOTNOTES:

[A] NOTE.--Having been asked by Dr. Pole Evans to see the proofs of the
first sheets of this new work through the press, he empowered me to
make any change of nomenclature that might be necessary. For owing to
the want of types and some of the rarer books at Pretoria, it is not
always possible to make correct identifications there. From this cause
the plants represented upon Plates 3 and 4 were misidentified, and the
names “_Arctotis decurrens_” and “_Cyrtanthus angustifolius_” already
printed upon the plates before they came into my hands for verification
and found to represent new species. I have therefore substituted new
names for these two plants, and have added Latin descriptions compiled
from the drawings and Dr. Phillips’ English descriptions, which have
not been altered.

It may not be out of place to state that the true _Arctotis decurrens_,
Jacq. (which this species was supposed to be), differs by the basal
leaves having usually only one small lobe or (grown under the condition
of much moisture in a rich soil) two lobes on each side, and an
elongated ovate oblong terminal lobe twice or more than twice as long
as broad; the branching stem and peduncles have small entire leaves
scattered along them; the ray florets are without a yellow spot at the
base, and the pappus-scales are truncate (not pointed) at the tips.--N.
E. BROWN.

[B] As stated under Plate 3, this plant had been supposed to be a
form of _C. angustifolius_, and that name has unfortunately been
printed upon the plate. It proves to be an entirely new species, well
characterised by the very slender curved basal part of the flower-tube,
and the long, tapering and very acute tips of the leaves, which are
narrowed at the base into terete petioles, and also, to judge from the
figure, are not produced at the same time as the flowers. In the true
_C. angustifolius_, Aiton, the flowers and leaves are produced at the
same time, the latter are flat to the base and very shortly pointed at
the tips; the tube of the flower gradually narrows from apex to base
without being contracted into a very slender basal part, and is less
curved there.

There is a large-flowered variety of _C. angustifolius_ known as var.
_grandiflorus_, Baker, which does not seem to be clearly understood in
South Africa. A good figure of it, but reduced in size, appears in the
_Gardeners’ Chronicle_, 1905, vol. 37, p. 261, f. 110, No. 2.--N. E.
BROWN.

[C] NOTE. Although mistaken in South Africa for an allied species, this
pretty bulb differs from all the other small-flowered species in the
genus by its broad linear-lanceolate leaves, and the broadly elliptic
or suborbicular perianth-lobes, which have suggested the specific
name to me. In all the other species the perianth-lobes are oblong or
elliptic-oblong. My description is compiled partly from the English
description of Dr. Phillips and partly from a dried specimen.--N. E.
BROWN.

[D] NOTE.--As Dr. Phillips has compared this plant with _S. Burmanni
Sweet_, I would like to point out that it is very doubtful if the _S.
Burmanni_ of the _Flora Capensis_ and the specimens in Herbaria so
named, really represent the plant figured by Burmann, upon which that
species was founded. Burmann (_Rar. Afr. Pl._ p. 7, t. 31) represents
a plant with stems about half as thick as those of _S. rigidum_,
constricted into short globose joints, with crenate (not entire)
leaves and small flowers, of which he does not state the colours. I am
doubtful if this plant is at present correctly represented in Herbaria.

It may also be well to point out that although the authority for the
genus _Sarcocaulon_ and the species _S. Burmanni_ and _S. Heritieri_
are attributed to De Candolle in the _Flora Capensis_ they should be
credited to Sweet, since De Candolle described them both as species
of _Monsonia_ under the section _Sarcocaulon_, which Sweet rightly
recognised as a distinct genus.

                                                           N. E. BROWN.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flowering Plants of South Africa;
vol. 1/3, by I.B. Pole Evans

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWERING PLANTS ***

***** This file should be named 62884-0.txt or 62884-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/8/8/62884/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
